And, O monarch, this also is an excellent season for thy son to go ahunting!
O, return in haste, and with your brothers search for him.
Thy wish, O son of Kunti, is about to be gratified.
When by the repeated descents of their maces, O monarch, they mangled each other, the battle they fought became exceedingly dreadful and perfectly unrestrained.
Strong men, O monarch, engage in battle depending on their might, and not on the force of numbers nor on information of the enemys plans procured through spies.
Worshipped by those regenerate ones, Vala, O king, then set out from that foremost of all tirthas on the Sarasvati (Sapta-Saraswat).
Do thou, O beautiful one, know these sacrificing priests that are seven by their nature.
Why dost thou not behold me, O wretch, standing here for an encounter with the mace?
I have now told thee, O thou of great splendour, everything about the acts, O Bharata, of both the Kurus and the Pandavas.
Hearing these words of his, Amva then, O king, afflicted with the arrows of the god of love, addressed Salwa, saying, Say not so, O lord of the earth, for it is not so!
In that tirtha, the celestials had, in days of yore, O king, installed Skanda, that slayer of the enemies of the gods, in the supreme command of their army.
That which we could not in imagination even aspire to obtain hath now become ours, O thou of unfading glory!
O Brahmana, the fire spread, and consumed the lions, elephants and other creatures that were on the mountain.
He that disregarding profit and duty, turneth his thoughts to sin must, O Partha, reap the fruit of his sinful actions.
And surrounded, O king, by a large army consisting of the four kinds of forces, the hero came back to the excellent city of Sakraprastha.
O hero, as thou art leading the life of an anchorite, this slaughter without cause is unlike thee.
Arjuna replied,--Superior persons, O Bharata, never prate about the harsh words that may or may not be uttered by inferior men.
As thou tellest me, O, Bhishma, I am Kuntis son, and not the son of a Suta!
The son of Drona then, O Bharata, pierced Arjuna with a dozen gold-winged arrows of great energy and Vasudeva with ten.
And, O Bharata, Drona, hearing the twang of his bowstring in the night, came to him, and clasping him, said, Truly do I tell thee that I shall do that unto thee by which there shall not be an archer equal to thee in this world.
Hearing these words of Duryodhana, Kama said, Let other spies, abler and more cunning, and capable of accomplishing their object, quickly go hence, O Bharata.
So also, O Yudhishthira, a person skilled at dice approacheth one that is not so skilled from a desire of vanquishing him.
I desire, O lord, to dwell within the dominions of another king.
Addressing one another, O Bharata, they declared their names and families.
Know, O king, that all these ladies of thy house are staying with their feet raised for the journey, from desire of beholding Kunti, and Gandhari, and my father-in-law.
Addressing Bhimas daughter, O Bharata, he distressed king Nala spake those words unto Damayanti over and over again.
O king of the Kurus, as thou art born in the race of the Pauravas ever noted for white (virtuous) deeds, such an act hath scarcely been worthy of thee.
And, O hero, without doubt, my affection towards thee is now the same as before.
And Dhritarashtra then addressed Gandhari and said, Behold, O Gandhari, this thy son of wicked soul, transgressing all my commands, is about to sacrifice both sovereignty and life in consequence of his lust for sovereignty.
At Dhritarashtras departure, O king, all the citizens of Hastinapore became as distressed as they had been, O monarch, when they had witnessed the departure of the Pandavas in former days after their defeat at the match at dice.
Vaisampayana said,--O best of the Bharatas, O great king, if thou desirest to hear, then listen to me as I narrate to thee everything again in detail.
And, O king of kings, Bhishmaka, the mighty king of the Bhojas--the friend of Indra--the slayer of hostile heroes--who governs a fourth part of the world, who by his learning conquered the Pandyas and the Kratha-Kausikas, whose brother the brave Akriti was like Rama, the son of Jamdagni, hath become a servitor to the king of Magadha.
Let him, O Dhritarashtra, rule the earth, to the exclusion of all thy sons, Yudhishthira is the foremost of all thy heirs.
Re-instating them in their position, thou wilt, in this world, be cleansed of all thy sins and be, O king of men, an object of worship with even those that have their souls under control.
The arms of many combatants, decked with ornaments of gold, cut off, O king, by foes, writhed on the ground, making diverse kinds of motions.
Therefore, O Vidura, go whither-so-ever thou pleasest.
And, O lord of the earth, Nala suffered such dire woe all alone and recovered his prosperity, whereas thou, O son of Pandu, with heart fixed on virtue, art sporting in joy in this great forest, accompanied by thy brothers and Krishna.
What, however, O Pandavas, is capable of being done by either speech or act, will all be done by me.
King Duryodhana, beholding that carnage of his own troops, O lord, became filled with rage.
Then Drona, O monarch, proclaiming his name in that battle, covered Bhima said, That car which formerly bore Brahma and Isana and Indra and Varuna (to battle), mounting upon that car, have two Krishnas gone.
And, O Duryodhana, like thee who lookest upon this kingdom as thy paternal property, the Pandavas also look upon it as their paternal possession.
O monarch, binding Duryodhana fast, make peace with the Pandavas.
This wonderful feat, O king, was accomplished there by that great river.
Their names, O king, were Pushpotkata, Raka and Malini.
Repairing thither, O son of Pritha, with thy brothers, enjoy ye in that mansion and sit to a friendly match at dice.
Here, in this region, O bull among Bharatas, the regents of the worlds, O Galava, every morning and evening, proclaim, What business of what person shall we do?
Hearing of and beholding that great danger of his brother (Yudhishthira), Partha quickly addressed Krishna, saying, Urge the steeds, O Hrishikesha.
Possessed of great prowess and great dexterity of hand, that mighty car-warrior for the sake of Bhishma, battled with Chekitana, O Bharata, according to the utmost of his power.
Knowest thou not, that Kesava is incapable of being withstood in battle by gods and men and Vaisampayana said, After Vidura had said this, Kesava, that slayer of hostile divisions, endued with great energy, addressed Dhritarashtras son, Duryodhana, and said, From delusion, O Suyodhana, thou regardest great speed, the clatter of whose wheels resounded like the rumbling of the clouds, and which was covered all over with white tiger-skins, and unto which were harnessed his steeds Saivya (and others).
What dost thou do here, O timid one?
Sanjaya continued, Thus rebuked, O monarch, by Yudhishthira and his brothers, thy royal son, lying within those waters, O king of kings, heard those bitter words and became very miserable.
A portion remains of the share allotted to Karna and thyself, O thou of great splendour.
Hath any evil befallen thy troops, O Bharata?
O child, these thy brothers are all fatigued and thirsty.
Supporting themselves against broken boxes of cars and the bodies of slain elephants and steeds, behold, O thou of great might, those ladies, worn out with fatigue, are resting themselves.
And hearing that the dice were uniformly unfavourable to the virtuous Nala, and that he had lost everything, she again spake unto her nurse, saying, O Vrihatsena, go thou again in Nalas name to bring hither, O blessed one, the charioteer, Varshneya.
Indeed, O lord, the kingdom of that monarch began to waste away, even as a large forest begins to disappear when men proceed to cut it down with the axe.
If I stay in battle and fight the Pandavas, my army, O driver, will rally and come back with vigour to battle.
I find the fire-god come in his own embodiment, this day, therefore do thou, O Muni, offer him a seat and water, and a cow, and water for washing the feet.
Beholding the celebrated king of the Kulutas slain, thy troops, O bull of Bharatas race exceedingly distressed, fled away.
O child, when we grew weary of the long periods of life alloted to us, it was then that we desired our own destruction through the instrumentality of the Kshatriyas.
Then Drona slew Viratas steeds with eight straight shafts, and then his charioteer, O chief of the Bharatas, with one shaft.
During the progress of that fierce battle, and after Dhrishtadyumnas son had been slain, Krishna, O lion among kings, addressed Partha, saying, The Pancalas are being exterminated.
O king, thou art our revered superior and chief refuge.
The powerful Dhrishtadyumna followed without loss of time king Virata: and Dhananjaya followed the illustrious and mighty charioteer Yajnasena; and the mighty Bhimasena followed Bhishma and Dhritarashtra: and Sahadeva, that master of battle, followed the brave Drona and his son; and Nakula, O king, followed Suvala with his son; and the sons of Draupadi with the son of Subhadra followed those mighty warriors--the kings of the mountainous countries.
For evermore, O Sanjaya, my desire hath been that I should tell them nothing else than that peace would be acceptable to king Dhritarashtra.
A little after, O monarch, the son of Prishata in sweet accents asked the illustrious Rishi about the wedding of his daughter.
O mother, either let him enter the palace, or give me permission to go to him.
Why then, O lord, hast thou come in person?
Knowing this, O bull of Bharatas race, and deliberating in thy mind, it behoveth thee, O mighty-armed one, to accomplish what is proper.
It behoveth me not, O thou of sweet smiles, to instruct thee as to thy duties towards thy lords.
And then, O king, the earth, oppressed with weight and afflicted with fear, sought the protection of the Grandsire of all creatures.
And when I was tired, they that brought those valuable articles from distant Duryodhana said,--Listen now, O Bharata, about all the most costly articles I saw, belonging unto the sons of Pandu, and brought one after another by the kings of the earth.
But, O thou blest with length of days, those that guide the car are taught that the warrior on the car is, by all means, to be protected by his charioteer!
Those kings, however, O monarch, that had been the Yajamanas of Gautama, continued to worship Gautamas sons after the sire had proceeded to heaven.
Dhritarashtra said,--When the Sun rose, O Sanjaya, of my army led by Bhishma and the Pandava army led by Bhima, which first cheerfully approached the other, desirous of fight?
Beholding Vabhru slain, Keshava of great energy addressed his elder brother and said, ‘Do thou, O Rama wait for me here till I place the ladies under the care of kinsmen.’ Entering the city of Dwaravati, Janardana said these words unto his father, ‘Do thou protect all the ladies of our house, till Dhananjaya comes.
And I also, O king, with my arrows resembling snakes of virulent poison, cut into fragments all those arrows of Rama and caused them to fall down on the earth like snakes cut into pieces.
Bestow me on Agastya, and, O father, save thyself, by giving me away.
A perfect Babel of voices of the shouting warriors was incessantly heard there, O royal Bharata, as they addressed one another by name.
The Vasus then said, It behoveth thee to throw thy children after birth, into the water, so that, O thou of three courses (celestial, terrestrial, and subterranean) we may be rescued soon without having to live on earth for any length of time.
I dare not, O foremost of regenerate ones, address such humble words to the Pandavas.
The earth being drenched with blood, O king, that thick and frightful dust soon disappeared.
52 Sanjaya said, Those Kshatriyas, O monarch, harbouring feelings of animosity against one another and longing to take one anothers life, began to slay one another in that battle.
And the king said, Go, O child, unto Gandhari, possessed of great wisdom and foresight and bring her hither.
And, O descendant of Kurus, beholding his son--that enhancer of Kausalyas joy--king Dasaratha became highly pleased.
O scion of Madhus race!
Thou art not, O sinful man, willing to give them their paternal share in the kingdom, although they are begging it of thee.
O tell us truly, for we have great doubts!
Arjuna said,--How, O slayer of Madhu, can I with arrows contend in battle against Bhishma and Drona, deserving as they are.
Will, O king, her residence in the woods be productive of fruits?
Thou art competent, O mighty-armed one, aided by thy own celestial energy, to afflict, O giver of honours, the Pandavas and the Panchalas.
With acts and means and applying thy power of illusion to these waters, slay, O chief of the Bharatas, this Suyodhana, who is the very soul of illusion!
The sun, O Bharata, had risen when the battle commenced.
O thou of large eyes, till the termination of this my vow, I cannot enter thy city.
O sire, when the destruction of all creatures approacheth, wrong assuming the semblance of right leaveth not the heart.
Vidura further told me, As long also as Dhritarashtra will live, O giver of honours, even that sinful wight will act sinfully towards you!
Shalya, however, quickly pierced in return each of those great bowmen with five arrows, O king, which feat seemed exceedingly wonderful.
Either seize king Yudhishthira the just or slay Dhananjaya and Bhimasena, O son of Radha, and the twin sons of Madri.
O Bhima, that Arjuna the clatter of whose car-wheels caused the entire earth with her mountains and forests, her mobile and immobile things to tremble, and whose birth dispelled all the sorrows of Kunti, that exalted hero, that younger brother of thine, O Bhimasena, now maketh me weep for him.
Do thou therefore, O Arjuna, the son of Kunti, select some spot where we may pass our days undiscovered by our enemies.
this doubt of thine that is born of ignorance and that dwelleth in thy mind, betake to devotion, (and) arise, O son of Bharata.
And, O bull in Bharatas race, Yudhishthira paid homage unto virtue, pleasure, and profit, in judicious proportion, as if each were a friend dear unto him as his own self.
What, O Karna, dost thou think?
The king ascertaining everything, was filled with joy, and addressing that female cannibal disguised as a human being possessing the complexion of gold, asked,--O thou of the complexion of the filament of the lotus, who art thou that givest me this child?
Then Samana and Udana also, O blessed one, said these words--Thou dost not dwell here, pervading all this, as we do.
Know that this excellent child is conversant with all weapons, O monarch, take him now.
If thou strivest for peace by restraining thy sons, it will be to thy profit, O king, as also to the benefit of the Pandavas.
Do thou, O celestial sage, listen, even from her as to the husband she hath chosen herself!
By the little merit I have acquired through waiting dutifully on my husband, by that merit so difficult to attain, I shall curse thee, O wielder of the discus and the mace!
Hearing this Kichaka said, I will, O thou of graceful hips, do even as thou sayest.
And, O king, free from guile and with a cheerful spirit, one should, according to his power, bestow gifts, after going down to the recipient and paying him homage.
Thousands among them, O king, were exceedingly terrible, looking like infuriated elephants of gigantic size.
O thou of ascetic wealth, I desire to hear the histories in detail of those famous monarchs endued with learning and all accomplishments.
Indeed, with those lifeless heads with upturned eyes, that were exceedingly mangled (with shafts and other weapons), the field of battle, O king, looked resplendent as if strewn with full blown lotuses.
Well-cased in armour and coats of mail and adorned with head-gears, combatants endued with great strength rushed at their foes, with maces and short clubs and spiked bludgeons looking like uplifted rods of the Destroyer, and jumping, O sire, and challenging one another, uttered loud shouts.
Therefore, O Bhima, slay not his soldiers.
Like the tempest agitating the ocean, Vijaya, O foremost of kings, in that battle, agitated that host of thine teeming with horsemen.
Shalya said, All great car-warriors, O Karna, say that this foremost of car-warriors, (Arjuna), even when alone, is invincible.
Blessed be thou, O mighty-armed Duryodhana, judge properly!
O illustrious one, bestow on us good fortune and joy.
With this wealth, O king, I will stake with thee.
Uluka also, O king, desirous of rescuing his sire in that engagement, pierced Bhima with seven arrows and Sahadeva with seventy.
Towards the close of that period, O sinless one, Vyasa came there.
O thou lord of birds, be propitious to us who solicit thy mercy!
50 The Siddhis said, Listen, O Devala of rigid vows, as we speak to thee the truth.
O sire, the mighty bowmen of both thy army and that of the Pandavas, inflamed with wrath, fought furiously with one another, as if they were possessed of by the Rakshasas and demons.
Amva said, My misery, O holy one, should by any means be dispelled by thee.
Reflecting on all this, O thou of Vrishnis race, I looked on with indifference!
O chief of the Bharatas, for whatever acts I may be fit, employing myself therein with my whole heart, I will bear the burthen of those acts of thine.
On that occasion, O Krishna, I said unto king Duryodhana, O son, cast off (from thy side) the wrathful Shakuni.
Having seen, O Krishna, the princess of Panchala brought in that plight into the midst of the assembly, how can my wrath be appeased without the slaughter of Suyodhana.
Galava said, O Garuda, O slayer of foremost snakes, O thou of beautiful feathers, O son of Vinata, carry me, O Tarkhya, to the east where the two eyes of Dharma are first opened.
Having vanquished the son of Drona, and other great car-warriors, Arjuna, O king, addressing Vasudeva, said, Behold, O Krishna of mighty arms, the Pandava army is flying away.
Deprived of his shield, O monarch, and placed under Kripas power Shikhandi still rushed, sword in hand, (towards Kripa), like a sick man towards the jaws of Death.
Bhima said,--Shall I, O king, slay, without loss of time all these foes assembled together, even here, or shall I destroy them, O Bharata, by the roots, outside this palace?
O child, although thou livest unharmed, having slain all my children, yet no grief would have been mine if thou hadst adopted the path of righteousness (in slaying them).’ Vaishampayana continued, Having said these words, Gandhari, filled with wrath at the slaughter of all her sons and grandsons, enquired after Yudhishthira, saying, ‘Where is the king?’ After she had said these words king Yudhishthira, trembling and with joined hands, approached her and said these soft words unto her, ‘Here is Yudhishthira, O goddess, that cruel slayer of thy sons!
And Yudhishthira said, O valiant king, it has been well-done by thee that being pleased at heart thou hast plighted thy truth to Duryodhana.
Salya continued, Indra, well-pleased, began to question that best of saints and greatest of Brahmanas when he was seated on a seat after receiving due honours, thus, O revered saint, O best of Brahmanas, I wish to have it recited by thee how Nahusha of vicious soul was hurled from heaven.
And the Kuru king, going over the plain with Karna in his company, caused his camp to be measured out on a level part, O monarch, of that plain.
Having achieved the most difficult feats, both of them, O sinless one, have departed hence to heaven.
Having praised Mahadeva in this manner, the Rishi bowed to him, Let not this absence of gravity, ridiculous in the extreme, that I displayed, O god, destroy my ascetic merit!
With his Sanjaya said, In the afternoon of that day, O king, a dreadful battle, characterised by roars, deep as those of the clouds, once more occurred between Drona and the Somakas.
O grinder of foes, cheerful I was not when taken away by Bhishma!
Arjuna said, Where, indeed, is that Brahmanas wife, O Krishna, and where is that foremost of Brahmanas, by both of whom was such success attained.
The auspicious damsel, bearing those words of the great Rishi in her mind, began to cook those jujubes although the latter, O king, showed no signs of softening.
Then, O Bharata, heaps of fallen wheels and yokes, of quivers, of banners and standards, with the vehicles themselves that bore them, of shafts and Anukarshas and Trivenus, of axles and traces and goads, of heads of warriors decked with earrings and headgears, of arms, O monarch, and thighs in thousands of umbrellas along with fans, and of diadems and crowns, were seen along the tracks of Parthas car.
In consequence of the strength of thy penances, thou art able, O highly blessed one, to burn, with thy eyes kindled with rage, the whole Earth with her mobile and immobile creatures!
Sakra replied, Thy prowess is unrivalled, O hero, do thou therefore vanquish the enemies of the gods.
Beholding his sons and grandsons and brothers and friends lying dead, he said unto me these words, O chief of Bharata’s race, The destruction of this our race has at last come.
Then, O Janamejaya, the Earth, opening with those strokes having the force of thunder, yielded a way to the (nether) regions inhabited by the Nagas.
Urging their steeds and elephants to greater speed, thousands of warriors fled away, O bull of Bharatas race, bent only upon their own safety.
And, O Bharata, that hero also felled the foremost of cavalry soldiers.
And, O son of Pandu, when the illustrious one found that death did not result from that fall, he kindled a huge fire in the forest and entered it with alacrity.
Rule over her, O monarch, and observe the duties of thy order!
On what food, O puissant one, did the high-souled Pandavas support themselves, with their men, and wives, while they lived in the woods?
At this, the royal son of Dharma bowing with his brothers unto Narada, who was the revered of the celestials, told him with joined hands, O thou that art highly blessed and worshipped by all the worlds when thou art gratified with me, I regard all my wishes in consequence of thy grace, as already fulfilled, O thou of excellent vows!
Indra said, Thou, O Brahmana, hast attained all the object of thy desire when thou hast become the excellent priest of the gods, versed in all the sacred hymns, and hast overreached the influence of death and dotage, what can Samvarta do to thee now?
I am incapable, O king, of counting the descendants of these, countless as they are, are not much known to fame.
O prince, know me now to have completed my vow.
For the sake of my friendship for thee, for my affection, and for thy being an ally,--for these three reasons thou still livest, O Shalya.
After Drupada had ceased, Dhrishtadyumna spoke, saying O bull amongst Brahmanas, O thou of ascetic wealth, how can, O Brahmana, the elder brother, if he is of a good disposition, approach the wife of his younger brother?
Then the kings of thy array, O monarch, exerting themselves at their best, accompanied by their forces, and placing Bhishma at their van, rushed against the Parthas in battle.
O king, the escape, therefore, of the sons of Pandu with life from that conflagration and their re-appearance, do away with thy evil repute.
The son said, Thou shouldst not, O mother, give expression to such views before thy son.
With that bow, O king, Indra had vanquished the Daityas.
Vyasa said, O king, O son of Vichitravirya, what thou sayest is true!
I shall see that gem brought to me after the slaughter of that wretch in battle, Placing that gem on thy head, O king, I shall endure to live.
I fear thy penances, O righteous one.
83 84 Sanjaya said, After the slaughter of Duhshasana, O king, ten of thy sons, heroes that never retreated from battle, all of whom were great car-warriors, endued with mighty energy, and filled with the poison of wrath, shrouded Bhima with their shafts.
Having vanquished him in battle, O king, Uluka proceeded quickly towards the Pancalas and the Srinjayas and began to slaughter them with sharp shafts.
Do thou, therefore, O Vrihannala, act as the charioteer of my brother.
If any person, O monarch, somehow escapes from diseases, Decrepitude, that destroyer of beauty, overwhelmshim afterwards.
Therefore, O thou of beautiful hips, forsaking the sons of Pandu, be happy by becoming my wife, and share thou with me the kingdoms of Sindhu and Sauvira.
Sanjaya continued, Thus addressed, O monarch, by the intelligent son of Dharma, thy son answered him from within the waters in these words.
Seeing him prostrate on the Earth, O lord, I took his infant son with me and have come to thee, desirous of thy protection.
Vaisampayana said, Devayani then, hearing those words of hers, exclaimed, O king, thus, Thou hast wronged me, O monarch!
Or, O Govinda, thou wilt today behold me slain with (Karnas) arrows.
Then the Dundubha, addressing Ruru, said, I have done thee no harm, O Brahmana!
And if any combatants will fight with me in the lists, then Arjuna replied, O lord of the Earth, I will declare myself as one of the neuter sex.
That Duryodhana, O Madhava, will behave with justice towards the Pandavas is what I cannot believe.
O mighty-armed one!
O Yudhishthira, it is only the worst of men that utter harsh words in quarrelling; while they that are indifferent reply to such when spoken by others.
O delighter of the Kurus, the diverse enjoyments we enjoy have all been acquired through thy puissance.
For thy love of me, thou also hadst corroborated it, and, O bull among kings, thou hadst performed all the rites prescribed for a son in respect of this daughter of mine!
Without doubt, O chief of Bharatas race, the ends of mortals are exceedingly uncertain, since Kunti, who is a princess by birth, is now living in misery in the woods.
Therefore, O king, I desire not to take it.
The entire welkin, O monarch, shrouded with falling swords of great brightness, seemed to become exceedingly beautiful.
How can he accept good counsels, who from folly, O Janardana, insolently disregarded his own aged sire as also his own well-meaning mother while speaking beneficial words unto him?
O king, let me or thyself have peace by a single combat.
O Karna, the slayer of Vana and Bhumis son (Naraka), Vasudeva himself, who hath, in the thickest of battle, slain foes equal and even superior to thee, protecteth the diadem-decked Arjuna.
The Kalingas, the Magadhas, the Kauravas the Westerners, the Gandharas have all been slain in dreadful battle, O son of Pandu!
Alas, these heartrending sorrows, due to Duryodhanas acts, many in number and like unto terrible darts, are now being borne by, me, O Sanjaya!
And Chitrasena and Vikarna and Bhagadatta, O sire, each struck him with ten arrows.
He that striveth after the acquisition of prosperity is, O king, a truly politic person.
And barring his father, not a man had ever before been seen by him; therefore his mind, O protector of men!
Do thou, O mighty-armed one, enjoy now those regions (of felicity) which have become thine through the Rajasuya sacrifice performed by thee and whose felicities have been enhanced by the sacrificial scimitar employed by thee.
Both of them, O monarch, shot showers of arrows like showers of rain poured by the clouds in the rainy season.
What is thy pleasure, O thou of sweet smiles.
And all the warriors, O king, excited with wrath, rushed against one another in battle.
Even the sage, O good Brahmana, whose vow is to do harm to no creature, doth inflict injury to animal life.
O illustrious lord, be inclined to grace.
O scion of Yadus race, O glorious one, if (now) with a pleased mind thou dost permit me to go to the ascetics retreat in the woods, then thou wouldst compass what is highly desired by me.
Then Dronas son, O monarch, with a straight shaft, pierced the forehead of Bhimas driver.
The Brahmanas gratified with various kinds of food and enjoyable articles, given away unto them to the extent of their desires, and with the heaps of jewels distributed amongst them, began to say,--King Harischandra is superior to all kings in energy and renown.--And know, O monarch, O bull of the Bharata race, it was for this reason that Harischandra shone more brightly than thousands of other kings.
And, O king, the Pandavas passed their days, continuing to gladden the heart of Draupadi.
I tell thee truly, O thou of mighty arms, that having once seen this lady, other women now seem to me like so many monkeys.
Karnas son also, avoiding Nakula, proceeded quickly, O sire, to where his father, the son of Radha, was for protecting his car-wheel.
Kasyapa said, I go there for wealth, give it unto me, O snake, so that taking thy gold.
Having fallen down, Bhima addressed king Yudhishthira the just, saying, ‘O king, behold, I who am thy darling have fallen down.
Strike now, O tiger among men, or thou wilt be deprived of thy senses.
Look at him, O foremost of men.
O crusher of foes, it hath been heard by us that alms are obtainable in the country of the Panchala, and that Yajnasena, the king thereof, is devoted to Brahmanas.
Tell us not harsh words always, O Vidura.
Let us, O Partha, sport in the waters as we please, in the company of friends.
And from that day forward, O Kuntis son!
Therefore, O monarch, adopt such counsels that we may not suffer perpetual distress, becoming dependent on others for our food.
And as the Pandava and the Panchala troops (on the one side) and the Kaurava troops (on the other), O Bharata, were engaged in slaughtering each other, there arose a furious uproar on the field.
Hearing these rebukes from Krishna, king Duryodhana, O monarch, gave way to wrath and endeavoured to rise.
Those instructions which thou imparted today, desirous of doing good to me, I shall certainly follow, O lord of Earth.
Such a person, O king, would obtain that which thou hast obtained.
Upon hearing these words of Arjuna, the Brahmanas and the other orders, O king, saluting him cheerfully walked round the foremost of virtuous men!
Bathing there and giving away diverse kinds of gifts, Valadeva then proceeded to the tirtha called Kauvera where the puissant Ailavila, having practised severe austerities, obtained, O king, the Lordship over all treasures.
O thou of mighty arms, who are they of whom king Vaivaswata is thinking today?
Like the great Vaitarani (separating the regions of life from those of the dead), the field of battle, O king, became uneven and impassable and unsightly and terrible, in consequence of steeds and cars and elephants, which struck with Dhananjayas shafts, were mangled and crushed and cut off in diverse ways.
Go Then Yudhishthira, filled with wrath, began to destroy thy ranks, in the sight, O sinless one, of the Pot-born (Drona) and of thy sons.
I shall, O king, be always attentive to that which is agreeable to this Brahmana, and what is fraught also with good to thee.
Then Arjuna, O monarch, covered that hostile division with showers of straight shafts like a cloud pouring torrents of rain on a mountain.
How then, O bull of Bharatas race, will our purpose be achieved?
By good luck, O lord, it is only after my death that my swelling prosperity abandons me for waiting upon another!
Listen, O Bharata, to the names of those illustrious mothers.
It behoveth thee not, therefore, O amiable Queen, to either doubt or censure God or act, with a foolish heart.
Thou, O Vrisha, seemest to be like one that is intoxicated with spirits.
Jaritari said, Thou art, O fire, the soul of air!
Yudhishthira then, O king, with his brothers repaired to that lake from desire of slaying Duryodhana.
O bid me do that which may not loosen my ascetic merit.
them owning standards of gold and prepared to struggle vigorously, proceeded with Bhimasena, and wore the aspect, O monarch, of the denizens of heaven with Indra at their head.
Having been the sire of a king and a king myself, O Sanjaya, how shall I pass my days as a slave obedient to the commands of Pandus son!
No king, O monarch, could ever acquire the sovereignty of the earth or prosperity or affluence by means of virtue alone.
And O father, virtuous and unswerving from the path of righteousness and inoffensive to all animated beings as thou wert, Vaisampayana said, Then on the fourteenth day of the moon, the mighty-souled Rama at the proper hour showed himself to those members of the priestly caste and also to the virtuous king (Yudhishthira) and his younger brothers.
The mother said, All the acts of those that are wise, are (undertaken), O son, for the sake of virtue and profit.
O thou of beautiful thighs, I believe in my heart that the sun hath no power to set in the usual time, if I am asleep.
But now that he is about to ascend to heaven, whom, O Karna, dost thou think fit to our commander after him?
O Pandava, the observance of virtue is a higher duty than the protection of life.
O Bhishma, praise Drona and Aswatthaman, who both father and son, are mighty warriors, worthy of praise, and the best of Brahmanas, and either of whom, O Bhishma, if enraged could annihilate this earth with its mobile and immobile creatures, as I believe.
O thou of restrained speech, I think myself unwell, I feel as if my head is being pierced with numerous darts.
And beholding in that conflict Visoka, the charioteer of Bhimasena, Dhrishtadyumna, O king, became exceedingly cheerless and almost deprived of his senses.
This is my opinion, O Achyuta!
This is thy victory, O lord!
As soon, however, as they were created, they ran O king, towards their sire, afflicted with hunger and desirous of devouring him.
Why, O king, didst thou not then give us the earth when we, observant of the rules of righteousness and desirous of the welfare of our race, had begged thee for our portion?
Hearing these words of Drupada, Yudhishthira answered, saying Be not cheerless, O king; let joy fill thy heart!
Therefore prepare thou O hero of great splendour!
With thy shafts reduced, and without quivers, with thy driver and steeds fatigued, and thyself mangled by foes with weapons, when thou wilt approach Partha, O son of Radha, thou wilt be an object of derision and mirth.
Those Mlecchas, however, O Janamejaya, in the very sight of Partha, retreated, taking away with them many foremost ladies of the Vrishnis and Andhakas.
12 Section 13 Vaishampayana continued, After he had thus been told nothing but the truth by Krishna, O monarch, king Dhritarashtra replied unto Devaki’s son, saying, ‘It is even so, O thou of mighty arms!
O handsome lady, know me as the sister of that chief of the Rakshasa.
Cherishing that hope in his heart, and drawing comfort from it, O Bharata, thy son Duryodhana, relying in battle upon that mighty car-warrior, the ruler of the Madras, regarded himself as possessed of a protector.
When after Karnas fall the Parthas had uttered leonine roars, a great fear, O king, had possessed the hearts of the Dhartarashtras.
Prosperity will be thine, O Monarch, if thou behavest well towards all thy relatives.
With Vahlikas permission, O prince, Santanu of world-wide fame, on the death of his father (Pratipa), became king and ruled the kingdom.
And, O Monarch, regarding me as the eldest and entitled to respect, Yudhishthira having received me respectfully, appointed me in receiving the jewels and gems (that were brought as tribute).
O Charioteer, I seek thy protection.
O revered sir, abandoning me thou mayest obtain another wife.
Bhima said, Since, O Visoka, thou tellest me of Arjunas arrival, I will give thee four and ten populous villages and a hundred female slaves and twenty cars, being pleased with thee, O Suta, for this agreeable intelligence imparted by thee!
Death from disease, O thou of Kurus race, doth not become a Kshatriya!
This death, O son of Pandu, at thy hands, king Yudhishthira will never regard as an offence committed by thee.
O thou of great puissance, I wish to attain, by my penances, to those regions of felicity which have been acquired by my husband.
Thus addressed by him, they replied unto that royal grinder of foes, saying, O monarch, the course that is thine, is also ours, O Bharata.
Dhritarashtra said,--Assembled together on the sacred plain of Sanjaya continued,---Thus addressed by Gudakesa, O Bharata, Hrishikesa, placing that excellent car between the two armies, in view of Bhishma and Drona and all the kings of the earth, said,--Behold, O Partha these assembled Kurus,--And there the son of Pritha beheld, standing (his) sires and grandsons, and friends, and father-in-law and well-wishers, in both the armies.
When the light of all the worlds thus disappeared, O sinless one, the gods then repaired to the Grandsire of the universe.
These also, O chief of Bharatas race, I shall unite with great benefit.
O foremost of men, slaying yon troops, seek battle with yonder bull of Bharatas race.
After concluding a recitation of the Bharata, one should, O king, perform a Homa with all its ten parts.
O bull of Bharatas race, what use is there in telling thee what is really conducive to thy happiness and good?
Therefore, O Lord, Bhishma may give me sovereignty by giving me good counsel, O Madhava.
55 Vaishampayana said, Even thus, O Janamejaya, did that terrible battle take place.
Bhimasena and the great car-warriors among the Somakas rushed, O monarch, against Kripa, desirous of slaughtering their foes in battle.
And, O king, accept this copper-vessel which I give unto thee.
And, O highly powerful one, O hero, when thou shall give leonine roars, then shall I with my own, add force to shouts.
Indeed, O king, Karnas son then slew with his excellent weapons the beautiful steeds of the delicate Nakula, that were of the Vanayu breed, white in hue, and decked with trappings of gold.
O suppressor of foes, those that have daughters, from the very nature of their obligations, must say what I say.
Know thou, O best of ascetics, that as he had succeeded in securing the protection of the Lord of the Celestials, I repaired to him with gratified heart, but he did not agree to act as my priest.
Then the mighty son of Jamadagni began to hurl celestial weapons at me, all of which I repelled, desirous of achieving mightier feats, O thou of strong arms, with-my weapons.
O best of Brahmanas, nowhere have I seen many men having one wife.
How, indeed, Sanjaya said, Beholding Duhsasanas car staying near his, the son of Bharadwaja, addressing Duhsasana, said these words, Why, O Duhsasana, are all these cars flying away?
And, after him, O first of men, thou hast acquired this hereditary kingdom of the Kurus for the last thousand years.
2 Vaishampayana said, Listen, O Janamejaya, to the nectar-like words that Vidura said unto the son of Vicitravirya and by which he gladdened that bull among men!
From this also, O son of Pandu, I have come to know Bhimas might.
Having known all this, O learned one, do what is beneficial.
But it behoveth thee, O Rishi, to show that love to me which I have for thee.
Vaisampayana continued, Hearing these lamentations expressed in diverse ways, of that royal sage, the grief, O Janamejaya, of Gandhari, became fresh.
Peace then, O king, will be amongst our gladdened selves.
And, O son of Pandu, he that fasteth three nights upon only one meal without a second during this period goeth into a region free from disease and anxiety.
That slayer of foes, Karna, O Sanjaya, is the prosperity, the armour, the fame, and the very hope of life, of the Kurus.
Reposing the cares of thy state on Dussasana, Durvisaha, Karna, and Suvalas son, thou desirest the continuance of thy prosperity, O Bharata.
But, O thou of the Kuru race, Pradyumna sailed out, and, O great king, bidding the Anarttas be of good cheer, said, Waver ye not, and staying behold me fight I Even I shall, by force, repell that car with Salwa on it!
Turvasu replied, I do not like decrepitude, O father, it takes away all appetites and enjoyments, strength and beauty of person, intellect, and even life.
The warriors, O king, thus urged by Bhimasena and the prince of the Panchalas, smothered the Kauravas, becoming reckless of their very lives.
Then, O sire, he cut off at the handle the bow, with arrow fixed on it, of Satyaki and then despatched the four steeds of the latter to Yamas abode.
A fierce battle took place there, O Bharata, in which the combatants struck one another with fists or seized one anothers hair or wrestled with one another with bare arms.
Then, O king, the royal son of Dharma, in that dreadful battle, quickly cut off with a razor-headed arrow one of the protectors of Shalyas car-wheels.
Then, O king, the gods with Brahma at their head and Rishis endued with the wealth of asceticism moved by the act of Mankanaka, represented the matter to Mahadeva, saying, It behoveth thee, O god, to act in such a way that this Rishi may not dance.
O son, except the thunder-bolt alone, tell me what it is that thou desirest to have!
Thou always residest, O god, in the Ocean, that home of makaras!
O thou of the fairest complexion, on what business hast thou come hither and whence hast thou come?
Offer him, however, O king, that hospitality which is the most agreeable to that illustrious one deserving of every respect, for there is no respect that may not be offered to Janardana.
And, O sinless one, hundreds of other heroic (Rakshasas), capable of moving through the sky, and of assuming any shape at will, will together carry you all with the Brahmanas.
Bhima said, I will, O timid one, do even as thou sayest.
O Pandava, beholding that foremost of warriors, Sahadeva, engaged in tending kine, and sleeping at night on calf-skins, how can I bear to live?
Vaisampayana said, Hearing those words of Dhritarashtra, Sakuni, when the opportunity presented itself, aided by Kama, spoke unto Duryodhana these words, Having exiled the heroic Pandavas by thy own prowess, O Bharata, rule thou this earth without a rival like the slayer of Samvara ruling the heaven!
fierce battle between thy troops and theirs, O Bharata, at that dreadful hour of midnight, increasing the population of Yamas kingdom.
From good fortune also, these two, Bhima and Dhananjaya, are well and arrived, O Bharata, it their own city unwounded.
These beneficial and excellent words, fraught with reason, that thou, O mighty-armed one, hast said do not seem acceptable to me, O foremost of Brahmanas.
Having reached the banks of the Dvaipayana lake, O chief of Kurus race, they beheld that receptacle of waters enchanted by thy son.
The treasury and the ministers of state, O king, are at this moment under our control.
Wait for me a little, O Yaja!
Seeing that warrior of great proficiency in battle, Bharadwajas son of great wisdom, with eyes expanded in joy, quickly came towards Kripa, and addressing him said, as if crushing (by that speech of his) the very vitals of thy son, O Bharata, the following words, Yonder cometh the youthful son of Subhadra at the head of the Parthas, delighting all his friends, and king Yudhishthira, and Nakula, and Sahadeva, and Bhimasena, the son of Pandu, and all his kinsmen, and relatives by marriage, and all who are watching the battle as spectators Dhritarashtra said, A mere child in years, brought up in great luxury, proud of the strength of his arms, accomplished in battle, endued with great heroism, the perpetuator of his race, and prepared to lay down his life--when Abhimanyu penetrated into the Katirava army, borne on his three-years old steeds of spirited mettle, was there any of great warriors, in Yudhishthiras army, that followed the son of Arjuna?
Hearing, O monarch, these words of mine now, proceed, O Partha, against that mighty car-warrior, the ruler of the Madras.
The delight that I feel, O thou of great beauty, on hearing from thee about my coming encounter with Kichaka, is equal to what I felt in slaying Hidimva.
That, however, O learned one, which I shall say, for inspiring thy confidence is fraught with self-adulation.
O thou illustrious one, ask the boon that thou mayst desire.
Vaisampayana said, Having spoken thus unto the king, (Kuvera) said unto Bhimasena, O child, O best of the Kurus, I do not mind this, O Bhima, as in order to please Krishna, thou hast, disregarding the gods and me also, committed this rash act, namely, the destruction of the Yakshas and the Rakshasas, depending on the strength of thy arms, I am well-pleased with thee.
It was for thy good, O chief of men, that Bhishma, firmly devoted to truth, himself told thee the means of his death in battle, and was slain by the heroic and high-souled Shikhandi, the son of Drupada, protected by me.
Renounce thy grief, O mighty sovereign.
But, O Sakra, I feel greater compassion for one that is weak and innocent!
Go, O mighty-armed one!
Then, O king, that foremost of men, the blessed king Nala began to soothe horses endued with energy and strength.
A little while after, O Bharata, that best of monarchs, deprived of all his senses by the Rakshasa within him, beholding Saktri who had cursed him, said, Because thou hast pronounced on me this extraordinary curse, therefore, I shall begin my life of cannibalism by devouring thee.
O ruler of men, I desire to smell thy head.
O thou resplendent as Agni, thou burnest all even as Surya in his anger burneth all creatures.
The unfading Brahma, soothing him by soft words, said unto him, O Sharva, what wert thou doing so long within the water?
O best of men, what ye see before you, of vast proportions like unto a mountain and beautiful as the Kailasa cliff, is a collection of the bones of the mighty Daitya Naraka, Being placed on a mountain, it looketh like one.
Stupefied by grief, they now, O king, refrained from even casting their eyes upon each other.
O Janaka, thou hearest my words as if thou hast been stupefied in consequence of having eaten the fruit of the Sleshmataki tree.
O excellent Brahmana, tell me all this in full as everything had happened.
Meanwhile Dhananjaya, O lord, proceeding against thy car-force, twanged his bow Gandiva celebrated over the three worlds.
And, O Pandava, the Gandharvas and the Apsaras also divert themselves in this lake.
O child, he is a true man upon whom favours are never lost.
And, O Bhima, hark unto the notes of the peacocks crying with their hens on the mountain slopes.
Those two who were regarded as Atirathas amongst the foremost of the Vrishnis, and referring to whom in course of conversation thou wert wont to indulge in pride, and who, O chief of Kuru’s race, were ever dear to Krishna himself—alas, those two, O Dhananjaya, have been the chief causes of the destruction of the Vrishnis!
Hearing Indras words, the celestials said unto their chief of a 1,000 eyes, Stop the royal sage, O Shakra by granting him a boon, if thou canst!
And at thy command, O king, let plenty of ornaments of pure gold be given unto Draupadi.
When I live in the order of the Gandharvas, I then, O son of Bhrigus race, act in every respect as a Gandharva.
I tell thee truly, O hero, that the Pandavas united with the Somakas are no match for thee in battle!
Those amongst the soldiers against whom the eldest Pandava proceeded, were overthrown by him, O king, like mountain summits riven with thunder.
Vaisampayana continued, Then on the occasion of an almsgiving, O king, Kunti fed on a certain night a large number of Brahmanas.
Having thyself established the unrivalled city of Indraprastha of the splendour of Kailasa itself, where dost thou go, leaving it, O illustrious and just king, O achiever of extraordinary deeds!
O protector of men!
Sakuni said, O son of the Kuru race, you have just heard what Kama hath said.
O ruler of men, thou alone of all the world, yielding to thy son whom no restraints can blind, hadst regarded thyself as crowned with success and abstained from avoiding dispute at the time of the match at dice.
O Karna, act according to the words of thy mother.
Thinking of and seeing his feats in battle, O Phalguna, I lose my energies in grief.
Let this plan recommend itself to thee, O slayer of foes.
Vaisampayana said, Thus addressed by the king, Puru answered with humility, I shall do, O monarch, as thou bidest me.
But Vidura, O king, in the name of Dhritarashtra repeatedly enquired with great affection after their welfare.
Besides, O king, Ashvatthama succeeded in accomplishing the feat only because the men were all asleep.
And, O holder of the mace and the discus.
And, O bull of Bharatas race, the mighty-armed Bhishma, O king, with his standard which was made of silver and graced with the device of the palmyra with five stars, setting upon his great car, shone like the lunar orb under the peak of Meru.
And, O bull among the twice-born, in this region that is superior to all, none can live that is unamiable, or of unbridled passions, or unrighteous.
Endued with great effulgence, Varuna, the highly blessed son of Aditi, had in days of yore performed in that tirtha the Rajasuya sacrifice, O lord of Earth!
And, O monarch, king Duryodhana beholding that vast wealth in the Rajasuya sacrifice and having become the victim of those numerous errors within the assembly house at last returned, with the leave of the Pandavas, to Hastinapore.
Ulupi, the daughter of the Naga chief, O thou of Kunti’s race, entered the waters of Ganga.
And, O Bharata.
O tell me of each as he was possessed of prowess and achievements.
Alas, my son, O Sanjaya, did not listen to those words!
Where, O foremost of men, hath that pride and that sense of honour which thou hadst now gone, since, O king, thou hast enchanted these waters and art now lying within them?
I shall not, however, O Savyasachin, discover thee to my father, as long as thou wilt not tell me to do it.
O Bharata, the limit and the like of the excellent and invaluable jewels that were brought there have not been seen.
O auspicious lady, I do not behold any one that may assist as their re-establishment and growth.
Thou, O Govinda, also knowest fully, and all things in details, both religion and profit.
Thus addressed by him, Janardana answered with a smile,--O best of kings, these words can come from thee alone!
Do not, O Madhava, give way to grief!
See, O Matali, if any bridegroom may be had here, acceptable to thee.
O ruler of Chedi, Bhishma knoweth Krishna truly.
Tell me, O foremost of regenerate ones, I am never satiated with listening to the grand feats of my ancestors.
What other friend have we, O Krishna, who like thee is so dear to us, who seeketh our welfare so, who is so conversant with the course of all actions, and who is so well-acquainted with truth?
O scorcher of foes, seeing the son of Kunti pass, having pierced through this host, those warriors that are protecting Jayadratha have become doubtful (of their ability to resist Partha).
O mighty-armed one, it is thy duty to dispel, by all means in thy power, the wrath of Gandhari!
Yudhishthira said, I ask thee, O foremost of regenerate ones, listen to what I have to say.
O, give me leave to sacrifice myself, and cherish thou my children.
Without rain, however, O son of Kunti, is never yieldeth crops.
And since the Sarasvati, in consequence of such contempt, is lost at that spot, the Rishis, for that reason, O chief of the Bharatas, always name the place as Vinasana.
Bhishma said, What is the use of thy talking, O Radhas son?
Those high-souled ones, O king, said unto Baladeva, Listen in detail, O Rama, as to whose asylum this was in days of yore!
Tell me truly, O thou that mowest down thy foes.
When thou shouldst joy and reward the Pandavas, thou art grieving, O king?
Through their acts they obtain heaven, O Bharata, or bliss, or woe.
In consequence of the transgressions of monarchs, Brahmanas, O foremost of kings, became the cause of evil to them, as Chyavana had become, in consequence of the act of Sukanya.
The mighty car-warrior Sushena, however, O king, piercing Nakula with ten shafts, quickly cut off the latters bow with a razor-headed arrow.
And, O Bharata, while speaking thus, Nala oppressed with grief, could not restrain his tears, but began to weep.
After hearing thy words, however, that heart, O Janardana, hath again become steady.
O blessed lady, polygamy is not fault with men.
O sinless one, the highspirited Yavakri finding that his father, who practised asceticism, was slighted by the Brahmanas, while Raivya with his sons was greatly respected by them, was overwhelmed with sorrow, and became sore aggrieved.
The serpent said, O king, if thou recognise him as a Brahmana by characteristics, then, O long-lived one, the distinction of caste becometh futile as long as conduct doth not come into play.
O, let her grace my spacious and beautiful palace, decked with various ornaments of gold, full of viands and drinks in profusion, with excellent plates, and containing every kind of plenty, besides elephants and horses and cars in myriads.
O Kichaka, hast thou no sense which leads thee to seek thy good and by which thy life may be saved?
Yudhishthira said,--I have, O son of Suvala, immeasurable kine and horses and milch cows with calves and goats and sheep in the country extending from the Parnasa to the eastern bank of the Sindu.
Let, O Vidura, large pavilions be constructed, rich with food and drink of diverse tastes collected in profusion.
Then, O Bharata, I could once more see the diverse single combats that the combatants fought at noon of day, each according to his strength and his rank, all of which were exceedingly fierce.
Whether thou accomplishest it now or afterwards, that feat, O sire, should be accomplished by thee.
O lord, a knowledge of the Vedas as learnt through teachers, is acquired in a long time.
The fame, O king, of all righteous men hath righteousness for its basis!
Since thou art truthful, therefore, O high-minded lady, do I appear in thy sight.
The three brothers then, O monarch, did as settled.
4 Neither I, O son, nor Kritavarma, will ever retreat from battle without having vanquished the Pandavas!
O son of Kurus race, if thou regainest thy natural disposition, the earth may continue to be peopled as now.
Take everything else, O Bharata, of which thou standest in need!
Intent on Yudhishthiras good, having slain many foremost of warriors, the brave Satyaki, skilled in weapons, is coming to thee, O Phalguna!
Assembling together the remnant of his cars which still numbered many hundreds, as also his elephants and horse and foot, O scorcher of foes, thy son said these words unto those warriors, Encountering all the Pandavas with their friends and allies, in this battle, and the prince of Pancala also with his own troops, and slaying them quickly, turn back from the fight!
That object also, cherished in thy heart, for the attainment of which thou strivest, O auspicious one, shall, O thou of beautiful face, be accomplished for thee!
For these thirteen years, O Dhananjaya, we have, from hope, lived relying on thee, like seeds sown on earth in expectation of the showers sent by the gods in season!
Thy gifts have, therefore, gratified the deities highly, O best of regenerate ones.
After this, the Kuru king Pandu, taking counsel with the great Rishis commanded Kunti to observe an auspicious vow for one full year, while he himself commenced, O Bharata, to stand upon one leg from morning to evening, and practise other severe austerities with mind rapt in meditation, for gratifying the lord of the celestials.
As soon as these words were spoken, O Bharata, jackals and other carnivorous animals began to howl ominously And marking those frightful omens all around, the assembled Brahmanas and the wise Vidura replied, O king, O bull among men, when these frightful omens are noticeable at the birth of thy eldest son, it is evident that he shall be the exterminator of thy race.
It was then that his forefathers of whom Richika was the first having arrived there addressed him thus, O Rama, O blessed Rama, O offspring of Bhrigu, we have been gratified with the reverence thou hast shown for thy ancestors and with thy valour, O mighty one!
Presuming upon his being a favourite of the king, Kichaka, O Bharata, hath enhanced my woe.
I do not behold, O Bhishma, the king that is equal in battle unto Drona or Aswatthaman.
Shrouded with the arrows of Sinis grandson, thy army, O monarch, fled away on all sides with great speed, and fell down deprived of life.
Vrihaspati said, Having, O Marutta, acted as priest to the Immortals, how can I act as such to mortal men, and whether thou dost depart hence or stay, I tell thee, I have ceased to act as priest to any but the Immortals.
O Sakra, it is not proper for me to confer on thee any unprofitable boon, for thou art the very lord of the celestials!
No longer beholding him who by his energy first burnt all hostile troops whom I afterwards despatched with shafts sped from Gandiva, I am filled with grief and my head swims, O best of men.
Abandoning wrath and enmity, O chastiser of foes, let these kings, embracing one another in peace, eating and drinking with one another, dressed in excellent robes and decked with garlands, and doing courtesies to one another, return to their respective homes.
What need have I of kingdom or of articles of enjoyment, what need of sacrifices or of happiness, when thou, O king, hast undergone go much affliction?
It was after this, O king, that the sons of Pandu, those great car-warriors, encountered the son of Drona, and putting forth their prowess, vanquished him, O monarch, (in the way already related).
Then Prativindhya, O Bharata, cutting off with his shafts the bow of his antagonist deeply struck the latter with five keen arrows.
And his practice of austerities, O subduer of foes, was rigid and terrible and of an exceedingly severe character.
O thou of great splendour, know, O Dhananjaya, that Karna, his dart being baffled through Ghatotkacha, is already slain hurl that fatal dart at Dhananjaya?
Having in battle subjugated both men and celestials and Gandharvas and Rakshasas, Varuna, O king, that slayer of hostile heroes, performed his grand sacrifice in that tirtha.
And after the mouse had gone, the wolf, O king, came there having performed his ablutions.
Know them all, O Krishna, that did thee any injury while thou wert afflicted, to have already gone to the abode of Yama.
Neither the gods nor the Danavas are capable of staying within the range of thy weapons, O son of Drona, slay the Panchalas and the Somakas with all their followers.
And, O king, that lotus-eyed lady then in due course of time brought forth a son of the splendour of a celestial child and of eyes like-lotus-petals.
And, O monarch, beholding Duryodhana thus offer him a slight by scratching the earth silently, Maitreya became angry.
Their eyes filled with tears, and hearts inspired with fear, they became, O king, melancholy an cheerless, and destitute of While the troops, deprived of energy, were thus flying away with speed, only Dronas son, Aswatthaman, like a huge alligator coming up against the current of a stream, rushed against his foes.
All of them, abandoning other kinds of food, observe vows and regulations, and take at due seasons the fruits of that lord of the forest for their sustenance and wander in separate bands, unseen by men, O foremost of human beings!
When, O son of Bhrigus race, I live in the order of the deities, I then verily act in every respect as a deity.
Ashtaka said, How, O father, do men attain to those superior regions whence there is no return to earthly life?
O king, during those days even robbers and cheats never spoke lies amongst themselves, nor they that were the favourites of the monarch.
Whatever, O mighty one, he purposeth to do is incapable of being frustrated by anybody by every means in his power.
I shall narrate to thee the story of the investiture of Kumara and the prowess of that high-souled one, since, O ruler of men thou wishest to hear it!
And Dhritarashtra hearing the ill news of the success of the Pandavas and recollecting the resolutions of Duryodhana, Kama, and Sakuni, pondered for a while and addressed to Sanjaya the following speech:-- Hear, O Sanjaya, all that happened thereupon and came to my knowledge.
If thou overthrowest Nahusha, then we shall be entitled to our shares of sacrificial offerings, O Indra.
There is only one person, Karna, who will slay the Pandavas along with the Srinjayas--even this is what Duryodhana, O Suta, used very often to say unto me.
Those steeds, fleet as the wind, thus urged, O tiger among men, proceeded with great speed.
That tiger among car-warriors, therefore, remembering his old hostility, will, O sire, fight with the Pandavas in battle, reckless of his very life which is so difficult to lay down.
Like the Grandsire holding the reins of Rudras steeds, do thou hold, without delay, the reins of Karnas steeds in battle, O thou of great splendour.
What, O lord, was the cause of the dispute between Vasishtha and Vishvamitra?
And, O thou who delightest in the observance of vows, O illustrious one, knowing everything yet influenced by paternal affection, I am unable to cast off my senseless son, Duryodhana!
O lord, divesting themselves of armour.
And approaching the king, she addressed him in these words, O mighty armed king, listen, O Lord, to these words of mine.
It behoveth thee not, O son, to afflict me after this.
No one that is acquainted with the distinctions of morality would act in the way, O Dhananjaya, in which thou, O son of Pandu, that art unacquainted with them, art acting today!
Meanwhile the high-souled Pandavas, O thou of Kuru’s race, and Draupadi of great fame, having observed the preliminary fast, set out with their faces towards the east.
Then ten car-warriors among the Pancalas, O monarch, surrounded Karna.
O handsome one, it behoveth thee with thy child to show us mercy.
Similarly, the Pandava host, O king, began to be slaughtered in hundreds and thousands in that battle by thy sons on every side with their arrows.
When Vrishasena, however, had deprived Nakula of his steeds, O Bharata, thou quaffedst in battle the blood from Duhshasana’s body!
Vrihadaswa said, O king, O thou that never fallest off, listen attentively with thy brothers, I will narrate the history of a prince more miserable than thyself.
Consider also, O king, how while out on his campaign of conquest, O king, thus admonished by Maitreya, Duryodhana began to slap his thigh resembling the trunk of the elephant, and smilingly began to scratch the ground with his foot.
Considering all this, and remembering too that sacrifice of thy own self is censurable, O, liberate today without loss of time thy own self, thy race, and these thy children (by abandoning me).
Both Nakula and Sahadeva, O Bharata, are fatigued, having fought with the wretched Dhartarashtras and their followers!
Mounting on that foremost of elephants, O monarch, he proceeded against the Pandavas and began to pierce them on all sides with keen and terrible shafts that resembled Indras thunder in force.
When Drupadas daughter endued with such a disposition, doth not enjoy uninterrupted happiness, it seemeth, O Govinda, that the happiness one enjoyeth is never the fruit of ones acts.
How, when all of you were together, could the mighty king of the Madras, as also my son, be slain, O Sanjaya, by the Pandavas?
Having done all that he should have done, the pupil, O perpetuator of Kurus race, attained to that seat repairing whither one has not to grieve.
The Brahmana said, In this connection is cited the ancient story, O blessed one, of what the institution is of the seven sacrificing priests.
Let prosperity be ever with thee, O Partha, and do thou obtain victory in battle.
But, O Lord, there is one thing that we desire to be done by thee.
Vaisampayana said, O Bharata, Kotikakhya related to those princes who had been waiting, all that had passed between him and Krishna.
Deer and buffaloes and birds, O monarch, in large numbers, placed thy army to their right, O king.
In this treatise, called Bharata, O foremost one of Bharata’s race, are to be seen in one place the eternal Rudras, the Saddhyas, and the Viswedevas; the Adityas, the two deities named the Ashvinis, the regents of the World, the great Rishis, the Guhyakas, the Gandharvas, the Nagas, the Vidyadharas, the Siddhas, the diverse deities, the Self-born visible in a body, with many ascetics; the Hills and Mountains, Oceans and Seas and Rivers, the diverse tribes of Apsaras; the Planets, the Years, the Half-years, and the Seasons; and the whole universe of mobile and immobile entities, with all the gods and Asuras.
The (Kaurava) troops are all tired, O sire!
Do thou (now), O highly powerful one, decrease thyself by thy own power.
And, O monarch, herself clad in a piece of red cloth, and wearing matted locks, and covered with dirt and dust, Damayanti then addressed Vahuka, saying, O Vahuka, hast thou ever seen any person acquainted with duty, who hath gone away, deserting his sleeping wife in the forest?
It seems to me, O Brahmana, that the cause could not be a light one, for it was Janardana of immeasurable soul who had himself to make the journey!
22 Sanjaya said, That foremost of car-warriors, O monarch, thy son, riding on his car and filled with the courage of despair, looked resplendent in that battle like Rudra himself of great valour.
And let him, ye best of immortals, stay Know also, O monarch, that the mighty car-warrior Dhrishtadyumna was a portion of Agni.
I will even take thee, O thou of agreeable smiles, with me to my capital.
Tell me what is in thy heart Smiling in modesty, she said to him, Give me, O best of celestials, a child endued with great strength and largeness of limbs and capable of humbling the pride of every body.
O king, making the slender-waisted Draupadi, who is even such as my stake, I will play with thee, O son of Suvala.
O son of Kurus race, today thou art not competent to give away the earth!
The preceptor, O monarch, is eagerly solicitous of seizing thee.
Having laid my commands over the whole Earth and having stayed over the heads of all, O Sanjaya, how shall I live now as a slave in wretchedness?
O lady, we wish to be restored to sight.
Therefore, O Dushmanta, support thy son and insult not Sakuntala.
And, O Bharata, that chastiser of all foes having thus caused Jarasandha to be slain, took leave of Yudhishthira and Pritha, and Draupadi and Subhadra, and Bhimasena and Arjuna and the twins Nakula and Sahadeva.
Describe them to me, O son of Gavalgana, once more!
Vaisampayana said, It hath been heard by us, O monarch, that what thou askest is a mystery even to the gods.
Then thou wilt get, O scion of Bharatas race!
Tell me all this in detail, O great Muni!
It seemed as if the three pursuits--virtue, pleasure, and profit--became personified on earth, and amongst them the king shone as After a few days, Vibhatsu, addressing Krishna, said, The summer days have set in, O Krishna!
If thou understandest what I have said, and if all I have said appears proper and sufficient, then, O Sanjaya, muster thy patience and gird up thy lions for victory.
Having reflected for a moment, the Grandsire, ever mindful of the welfare of the gods, bestowed upon him the status of a generalissimo among all creatures, O Bharata!
If thou knowest everything, do thou then, O girl of slender waist, tell me whether what I saw was only a dream or a reality!
Listen, O fool, to these words of mine: thither is victory where righteousness is.
O virtuous man, it is proper that thou shouldst see my father and my mother.
I shall destroy also thy hope of sovereignty, O king, and pay off all thy misdeeds unto the sons of Pandu!
I ask thee, O Duryodhana, O foremost of the Bharata race, desist from hostility.
The reciter, O chief of the Bharatas, should be possessed of learning and endued with a good voice and a clear utterance respecting both letters and words.
Accompanied and protected, O sire, by him in battle, the feats that Partha achieve are all before thee.
Having vanquished in battle the brave mountaineers, who were all great warriors, the son of Pandu, O king, then occupied with the help of his troops, the town protected by the Puru king.
O bull among men, we are competent to bring them thus under our sway.
Tell me all this, O Sanjaya.
And, O exalted one, the eighteen tribes of the Bhojas, from fear of Jarasandha, have all fled towards the west; so also have the Surasenas, the Bhadrakas, the Vodhas, the Salwas, the Patachchavas, the Susthalas, the Mukuttas, and the Kulindas, along with the Kuntis.
I am now once more calm, O Sanjaya, therefore, tell me how this slaughter of heroes is going on, having my evil policy for its cause.
Smeared with white sandal-paste, O king, Baladeva, repairing to that tirtha, duly gave away wealth unto many ascetics of cleansed souls.
O holy one, it behoveth thee to tell me all this accurately, O sinless one,--even thus was I interrogated by that learned Brahmana, O Madhava.
Some had swords and mallets and some were armed with bludgeons, O Bharata.
Through the fault of those two heroes who were thy dear disciples and who were much regarded by thee, also, O Partha, the Vrishnis have been destroyed.
O thou of the Bhrigu race, this wound rankled deep in the Rakshasas mind and he thought the present moment very opportune for carrying the lady away.
And while Bhishma was thus speaking, Karna wrathfully and insolently interrupted his words, and looking at Duryodhana said, There is no creature in the world, O Brahmana, who is not informed of all these facts.
And in that battle, O king, which was destructive of great heroes, when Bhishma and Dhananjaya the son of Pandu put forth their prowess, thy sons, O monarch, beholding the grandsire exert himself vigorously, approached him, with all their troops placed ahead.
these, O mighty monarch, purify a person of meritorious acts.
Why dost thou today, O Kichaka, solicit me so persistently even as a sick person wisheth for the night that will put a stop to his existence?
Thus addressed the mountain suddenly began to increase from wrath, desirous, O chastiser of foes, of obstructing the path of the Sun and the Moon.
Thither, O chief of the celestials, perform a sacrifice!
And, O thou of the Dasarha race, it behoveth thee, O thou of mighty arms, to grant me permission to celebrate a sacrifice along with thee and my younger brothers.
Unto the reciter, O king of men, gift of land should be made.
Good betide thee, O bull among men, it seems that they have perished without leaving a mark behind.
Alas, I have to see thee worn out with fasts, O thou that art the delighter of all thy kinsmen.
Vaisampayana said, Hearing these words of Vidura, Drupada said, It is Hearing this, Yudhishthira said, We are now, O monarch, with all our younger brothers, dependent on thee.
Thus addressed, Vidura, repeatedly trembling, slowly dismissed the ladies, O bull of Bharatas race.
Like a child wishing to have the moon, seekest thou, O fool, to do what cannot be done by the very gods, headed by Vasava with all their strength?
Dhritarashtra, said, Describe to me, O Sanjaya, the diverse kinds of standards resplendent with great beauty, of both the Partha and our warriors (in that battle).
And, O my boy, they assume lovely forms and try to allure by diverse means.
Without doubt, O Suyodhana, I am the destroyer of all the sons of Dhritarashtra, as Abhimanyu is of all the (younger) princes!
Let Vrihaspati (therefore) officiate as priest to that Mahendra the supreme Deva (god), the highest one wielding the thunderbolt, and O prince, Samvarta will act as my priest, as neither his (Indras) words, nor thine commend themselves to me.
There is no path, O monarch, that is better than the duty of battle.
If, however, O thou of Bhrigus race, the desire is entertained by thee of leaving this place, do thou go without delay, receiving my permission.
After this, O king, if thou wishest to hear words that are agreeable to thee, in respect of all acts good or bad, ask thou women and idiots and cripples or persons of that description.
O child, safely go thou blest by my prayers.
Let thy mind always take a pleasure in such righteousness as is involved, O king of kings, in thy desire of bestowing such a high boon on us.
This, in my opinion, is not Heaven.’ The gods said, ‘If thou longest to be there, go then, O son, without delay.
Hath this, O son of Pritha, been heard by thee with mind undirected to any other objects?
With patience and great strength, O monarch, the king of the Madras at the same time fought with the twins (Nakula and Sahadeva), each of whom resembled the Destroyer himself in prowess.
Assuredly, O Bharata Vishnu hath been desirous of taking back unto himself the energy that existeth in this Sisupala.
Thou, O Karna, art not born in the Suta order.
Thou wilt, O Krishna, say unto Suyodhana such words as are for our benefit.
Thy sire got back his life-breaths, O king.
The man, O king, who has restrained his senses and subdued wrath and covetousness, who is contented, and truthful in speech, succeeds in obtaining peace.
Then Kritavarma, O king, in that encounter, suddenly pierced Uttamauja in the chest, at which the latter sat down on the terrace of his car.
Salya said, This thy wish, O Yudhishthira, shall be accomplished, O son of Kunti.
Sanjaya said, Beholding Dhananjaya, that slayer of foes, lying weeping at his feet, O bull of Bharatas race, king Yudhishthira the just raised his brother.
Tell me, O Grandsire, what I should do in view of this.
Vrihaspati said, Thou art the mouth, O Agni, of all the gods.
Follow his counsels, O, monarch.
Is Krishna superior to thee in might of arms, O king?
For the extent of its waters, O Karna, what is a crow to it?
O Kaurava, his feelings towards us are otherwise.
Beholding the vehicle thus reduced to ashes, O lord, the sons of Pandu became filled with wonder, and Arjuna, O king, having saluted Krishna and bowed unto him, said these words, with joined hands and in an affectionate voice, O Govinda, O divine one, for what reason hath this car been consumed by fire?
And Nahusha said, Let it be so, O lady of lovely hips, even as thou art telling me.
Therefore, O Sutas son, do thou perform those sacrifices.
For the sake of virtue, of profit, of happiness, make peace, O king, and do not allow the Earths population to be slaughtered, regarding evil as good and good as evil.
O illustrious dame, we came hither in great anxiety.
Beaten and pierced by Bhimasena, those Krodhavasas quitted the field of battle, and in confusion quickly fled towards the Kailasa cliff, supporting Vaisampayana said, Then, O best of the Bharatas, Bhima began to collect those rare unearthly, variegated and fresh flowers in abundance.
Possessed of sure aim and skilled in smiting, the Pandavas, O monarch, not seeing in battle Duryodhana, who was then concealed, (were resting in their camp).
Women seemed to look like men, and men to look like women at that hour, O king, when thy son Duryodhana fell!
Gangas son knoweth not that weapon; nor Drona nor Gautama (Kripa); nor Dronas son, O king!
Sanjaya said, After the forenoon of that day, O Bharata, had passed away, and the sun in his westward course had passed a portion of his path, and after the high-souled Pandavas had won the victory, thy sire Devavrata, conversant with the distinction of all codes of morality, rushed carried by the fleetest steeds, towards the army of the Pandavas, protected by a large force and by all thy sons.
O son of Gautamas daughter, thy regard for us is great.
They are equal to those of Hariscandra, O son of Pritha.
13 14 Sanjaya said, Srutakarman then, O king, filled with wrath, struck that lord of Earth, viz., Citrasena, in that battle, with fifty shafts.
Yama, thus employed in that sacrifice, did not (during that period), O king, kill a single human being.
And, O son of the Bharata race, when I am near, and Drona and Bhishma and thou too, nothing evil that even Fate might have ordained is likely to happen.
And from this circumstance O king, he hath been celebrated as Karandhama.
And, O king, thou shalt also, with thy brothers, obtain great happiness.
Perceiving him staying on the field, thy son, O bull of Bharatas race, seeing his own army running away, rallied them with great courage.
O, tell me this, for thou art, in my judgment endued with intelligence.
Do thou, tell me about them, O thou of unfading glory.
Thus answered, Dhritarashtras son again said unto Janardana, It behoveth thee not, O Kesava, to behave towards us in this way, Whether thou becomest successful, or unsuccessful, we are endeavouring to please thee, O slayer of Madhu, because of thy relationship with us.
Desist, O king, it will not be otherwise.
Dhritarashtra said, O delighter of the Kurus, my mind is fixed, O son, on penances.
Krishna then met the deities and (celestial) Rishis and Charanas, O king, and the foremost ones among the Gandharvas and many beautiful Apsaras and Siddhas and Saddhyas.
Sanjaya continued, While they were discoursing thus, O king, the Pandava divisions appeared for battle.
O mighty-armed Yudhishthira, do not say so about king Duryodhana.
Thou shouldst, however, O son of Pritha, always fight with care with the son of Dhritarashtra!
Then, O king, the Pandavas with joined hands said unto the Rishi, So be it.
The plan they formed, O scorcher of foes, was to take Trita with them, and calling upon all their Yajamanas and collecting the needful number of animals, they would joyfully drink the Soma juice and acquire the great merits of sacrifice.
Indeed, those loud-sounding instruments were blown and beaten, O king, among both the armies.
If in the Dwaita woods thou hadst said unto me, O king, I shall not be able to fight with Karna, we would then, O Partha, have made other arrangements suitable to the circumstances.
Here did Mandhata himself, of a mighty bow, perform sacrificial rites for the gods; and so did Somaka, O Kuntis son!
Then the Prabhadrakas, O king, and the Somakas, were seen felled or falling by thousands, in consequence of Shalyas arrows.
For this, O thou of wicked understanding, thou deservest not to be slain with any weapon!
Having enquired into the truth regarding him, if, O lord, I obtain no news of him, then I shall visit thee; this tell I thee for truth.
And Takshaka answered, I am that Takshaka, O Brahmana, who shall burn that lord of the earth.
Then, O king, the Kauravas, mustering all their divisions, rushed against the Pandava army.
But thou, O son of Kunti, dost neither desire to recall thy sorrows nor thy happiness; what else dost thou desire to recall barring this delusion of sorrow?
Indeed, the Pandavas, inspired with desire of victory, O monarch, careered beautifully on all sides amongst thy divisions.
He, O king, is fit to be thy son-in-law and the husband of thy daughter.
Go, O Partha, and slay Karna.
Indeed, uttering such harsh words, thou, without any reason, findest fault with me alone, addressed regardfully as thou always art by the sons of Pritha, O slayer of Madhu.
Catching it as it coursed towards him, the high-souled king Citra, O Bharata, hurled the very weapon at Prativindhya.
And, O king of kings, the lord together with his brothers, worshipped Rama, and, O most righteous of the rulers of men, the very highest honours were paid by him to all those members of the twice-born class.
And, O king of men!
O king, that kingdom of thine which, abounding in prosperity, have before been taken by him at dice!
Do thou, O mighty being, take the leadership of the celestial forces accordingly.
All the Kshatriyas, O king, proceeded with great speed towards that lake called Dvaipayana.
Pushan gave him, O Bharata, two companions, Panitraka and Kalika, both endued with great powers of illusion.
Vaisampayana continued, Dwelling in the woods, O bull of the Bharata race, the high-souled Pandavas spent one and ten years in a miserable plight.
O thou of lair looks, it behoveth thee to raise offspring, at my command, through some Brahmana possessed of high ascetic merit.
I desire to hear everything, O Kshatta; describe to me all their acts.
Dhritarashtra said,--Thou hast given me, O Sanjaya, a description of Sakadwipa in brief.
O thou of great prosperity, let this speech of the wise become true.
Dhritarashtra said, Tell me, O Vidura, how with this body of mine I can meet with that ancient and immortal one?
I shall go to that Rakshasa today, attended by all my family in order that that wretch might devour us all at once Kunti said, Grieve not at all, O Brahmana, on account of this danger.
Whether the son of Pritha would enjoy the Earth, having slain Shalya, or whether Shalya having slain the son of Pandu would bestow the Earth on Duryodhana, could not be ascertained, O Bharata, by the warriors present there.
O Janamejaya, (about the remedy).
Who is there that would use force for getting over that calamity, O king, which can be overcome by conciliation and gift?
O mighty king, do thou therefore, comfort her.
Innumerable weapons, again, O Bharata, still retained in the grasp of the soldiers, seemed in their pendent attitude, to resemble falling meteors in the sky.
Indeed, although that king was earnestly solicited with diverse expressions such as these, the lord of the Salwas still did not, O bull of the Bharata race, manifest any inclination for accepting the girl.
He is very much attached to me, O monarch, and to thee also always.
What object is that, O king, whose accomplishment thou desirest from me?
And beholding this, O king, that Muni became ashamed and fell at the feet of the god.
And having travelled the whole distance (between Hastinapura and Salwas city), she approached king Salwa and said these words, I come, O thou of mighty arms, expectant of thee, O high-souled one!
O, are the sons of that foremost of Kurus, Vichitraviryas son alive?
And the celestial messenger said unto Ruru, Resign half of thy own life to thy bride, and then, O Ruru of the race of Bhrigu, thy Pramadvara shall rise from the ground.
The Earth looks beautiful, O Bharata, with arms smeared with sandal, decked with Angadas of gold and with Keyuras, and having their ends cased in leathern fences.
When the time came, O Janamejaya, they, plunged into the Sarasvati.
The king had first staked his brothers, then himself, and then thee, O princess.
Decked with jewels and made of silver, that tall standard bearing the device of the palmyra, cut off, O Bharata, by the shafts of Subhadras son, fell down on the earth.
No offence, therefore, in any way, attaches unto thee, O Pandava.
This high-souled son that is born of thee, O Kunti, will in beauty be the rival of Soma, in speed of the god of wind, in patience of Meru, in forgiveness of Earth, in splendour of Surya, in prosperity of the Lord of treasures, in courage of Sakra, and in might of Vishnu.
I say this to thee, O Duryodhana.
What I advised was, O Pandavas, highly beneficial, but the son of Amvika heeded me not.
Go, O king, and gratify that Rishi by the side of a receptacle of water on the bank of the Sarasvati!
Diverse portents, O hero, are visible, all indicating the slaughters of the Kshatriyas.
Waiting upon superiors, Truth, Freedom from anger, and Gift, these four, O Brahmana, are inseparably connected with behaviour that is virtuous.
At the same time, O Danava, I do not wish to frustrate thy intentions.
And because, O king, all men have a right to enjoy a portion of the merits earned by their offspring, it is for this that they desire to have daughters sons.
Entering his mansion, O king, he went through the morning rites and after gratifying many foremost of Brahmanas he took some food.
And Dussasana repeatedly said, Relent, O king!
Filled with rage, O monarch, Satyaki of unbaffled prowess then hurled at Shalya a lance equipped with a golden staff and decked with many jewels and gems.
O thou of mighty arms and wealth of asceticism, there I will approach thee for battle,--thee that art so fond of battle!
And the daughter of the king of Kasi, wandering hither and thither for her passionate desire of tirthas, once more came back, O Kauravya, to Vatsabhumi.
Vasudeva said, O scion of Bharatas race, salvation is not attained by foregoing the external things (like kingdom, etc), it is only attained by giving up things which pander to the flesh (body).
For investment of wealth are like Vaisampayana said, Thus addressed by Bhimasena, the high-souled king Ajatasatru firmly devoted to truth, mustering his patience, after a few moments said these words, No doubt, O Bharata, all this is true.
O hero, take before him this thy car that is capable of grinding hostile cars.
When his army was thus broken, the Kuru king, O monarch, rushed against both friends and foes.
Agni said, I accept thy offerings of water, seat, and water for washing the feet, O sinless one, do thou know me as the messenger of Indra, come to thee, in accordance with his directions.
And I too, O king, shooting sharp shafts by hundreds and thousands, repeatedly cut: off Ramas arrows in mid-air before they could come at me.
And, O king, the jackal, seeing him come, said, By the might of my arm have I defeated the others who have already fled.
Indeed, the firmament, O king, having been covered with that bright shower of arrows, a shadow, as that of the clouds, appeared there on the occasion.
Do thou, O son they have not come yet, O Bharata!
Then thy army, O monarch, which had lost a very large number of men, and which then consisted of a very few soldiers, became exceedingly cheerless, O king!
The encounter then, O king, that took place between Arjuna and the son of Adhiratha, became a very dreadful one.
See, O chief of the celestials, yonder cruel husbandman is belabouring my weak son with the wooden stick, and oppressing him with the (weight of the) plough, in consequence of which my child agitated with agony is falling upon the ground and is at the point of death.
Then, O monarch, Shikhandi sped at his foe ninety shafts of great impetuosity, all equipped with golden wings.
Asked by me, O answer it in full.
I desire, O Keshava to see king Ajatasatru!
Then king Duryodhana, in that encounter, O sire, with a broad-headed arrow whetted on stone, cut in twain the bow of the virtuous monarch.
But, O chief of the Satwatas, now that thou hast regained thy senses without much ado, do thou, O son of Kesava, witness my skill in guiding the horses!
It is in consequence of that fault, O sinful wretch, that thou art slain!
Do thou hear me, with concentrated attention, O regenerate one, as I speak to thee!
Vaisampayana said, O Janamejaya, having heard this story, all the Pandavas without delay and with alacrity, began to proceed by the way pointed out by Lomasa.
Seeing that he was comfortably seated, and recovered from fatigue, one of the Rishis beginning the conversation, asked him, Whence comest thou, O lotus-eyed Sauti, and where hast thou spent the time?
And the syllable Om, O king, standing in the van of that car, made it exceedingly beautiful.
Vaisampayana continued, Thus addressed, the Kuru king Yudhisthira of righteous soul then set his heart, O monarch, on making the necessary preparations for the horse-sacrifice.
Thus benefited of old by Pandu, shall not, O child, the citizens slay us with all our friends and relatives now on account of Yudhishthira?
Hearing of this meeting, O king, of thine with all these princes and princesses of thy house, I have come here, O delighter of the Kauravas, for dispelling thy doubts.
Then Yudhishthira and Sahadeva, O sire, each pierced the ruler of the Madras with ten arrows in the chest.
And, O son of Kunti, the heroic Samva, of prowess incapable of being baffled, whirling a quickly-going mace, hurled it speedily at Vegavat!
3 Vaishampayana said, King Yudhishthira the just, the son of Pritha, had not stayed there for more than a moment when, O thou of Kuru’s race, all the gods with Indra at their head came to that spot.
I have thus, O chief of men, told everything in thy presence.
Sakuntala, having listened to all this, answered, If this be the course sanctioned by religion, if, indeed, I am my own disposer, hear, O thou foremost one of Purus race, what my terms are.
It was then, O king, that mighty car-warrior, king Salya of immeasurable prowess, from behind summoned Bhishma, the son of Santanu, to an encounter.
But I am aggrieved on account of my son, and it is therefore, O Kausika, that I weep!
King Drupadas city was, O Bharata, naturally well-protected.
O repressor of foes, salute the king respectfully as before.
Markandeya continued, At these words, O best of men, of the fowler, that Brahmana endued with great wisdom, then asked the fowler, saying, How shall I know what is virtuous conduct?
Do not, O Bhima, touch a king and a kinsman with thy foot.
O king, with this my mate I was engaged in the gratification of my sexual desire.
Then king Yudhishthira, accompanied by his troops, rushed against Shalya alone, from desire of slaughtering him, O bull of Bharatas race.
Disregarding his poignant and unbearable pains, Duryodhana began to afflict Vasudeva with keen and bitter words, O son of Kansas slave, thou hast, it seems, no shame, for hast thou forgotten that I have been struck down most unfairly, judged by the rules that prevail in encounters with the mace?
At that time many brave warriors deprived of elephants and steeds and cars, and 25,000 foot-soldiers, O sire, proceeded slowly (for battle).
Therefore, O king, adore thou duly these Brahmanas (that are with thee).
Duryodhana said, Tell me, O grandsire, how Sikhandin, O Gangas son, having before been born a daughter, afterwards became a man, O foremost of warriors.
Thou wilt then, O excellent one, have done a meritorious art for both thyself and us.
And awfully difficult task again was that sojourn of thine,--the period of concealment,--which task also thou hast performed, O descendant of Bharata; for one pulled down from a throne it is nothing but hardship that awaits him.
Beholding the ruler of the Pandavas impetuously rushing against him, Salwa, that lion among kings, quickly urged his elephants, O king, for the destruction of Drupadas son.
Thus honoured by them and looked upon with auspicious glances, the old king, O chief of Bharatas race, joined his hands and honoured them all in return.
This is Heaven, O lord of men.
And winning the affections of those kings and uniting himself with them, he next marched, O king, against Vrihanta, the king of Uluka, making this earth tremble with the sound of his drums, the clatter of his chariot-wheels, and the roar of the elephants in his train.
After the defeat of the heroic son of Drupada, O lord, the Pandava army, slaughtered on all sides, fled away from the field.
Indeed, O father, thinking of all this, I have no peace of mind.
Vaisampayana said, O son of Kuru, they, Yudhishthira and others, ones, waited a moment, looking at that great saint, (bright) as the mid-day sun.
Which amongst those diverse kinds of flight is this, O crow, that thou art now practising?
And, O Bharata, there I heard of this achievement of Bhima from those Brahmanas who have assembled round the Pandavas.
Yudhishthira said, Come, Come, O Partha, O Vibhatsu, and embrace me, O son of Pandu.
Sanjaya said, Having addressed Arjuna in these words, the son of Parasara, O chief of the Bharatas, went away to the place he had come from, O chastiser of foes.
Thousands of trumpets then were blown in that great engagement, and a confused din of myriad voices arose there, O king.
Yudhishthira said, My first prayer, O lord of earth, is that I may not be involved in any dispute (on account of dice) with low people.
Through thy truthfulness, O monarch, Takshaka has with difficulty escaped a painful fate.
And dethroning him, they, O foremost of monarchs, invested his son Suvarcha with the rights of sovereignty and (having effected this) experienced joy (in their hearts).
Some have attained to the status of Guhyakas, O king.
O Sukra, water is thy parent as thou art the parent of water!
Hearing these words, Santanus son, O elder brother of Pandu, said unto the son of Pandu, As long as I am alive, O son of Kunti, victory cannot be yours in battle, O thou of great wisdom.
The field of battle is covered with shafts and darts and swords and axes and scimitars and spiked maces and lances and iron Kuntas and battle-axes, and the bodies of men and steeds and elephants, hacked with many wounds and covered with streams of blood and deprived of life, O slayer of foes.
And if vanquished in this struggle, thou shalt find thyself in the most wretched plight, and O son of Kunti, knowing this, and acting accordingly, shalt thou attain success.
At that sacrifice, O king, Yama, the son of Vivaswat, became the slayer of the devoted animals.
Tell me, O first of speakers, whence was his attachment to life and whence his happiness?
Therefore, O thou foremost of kings, worship thou these Brahmanas duly.
Where, O slayer of Madhu, words, good or bad, are of the same effect, no wise The holy one said, That, indeed, which should be said by a person of great wisdom: that, indeed, which should be said by one possessed of great foresight; that indeed, which should be said by one like thee to a friend like me; that indeed, which is deserving of thee, being consistent with virtue and profit, and truth; that, O Vidura, hath been said by thee, father and mother-like, unto me.
Vaisampayana continued, Bhimasena, thus exhorted by Arjuna of great wisdom, turning to Yudhishthira, replied, saying, As a great many of the enemys warriors have been slain and as they are flying in all directions, do thou, O king, now return home, taking with thee Draupadi and the twin brothers and high-souled Dhaumya, and console the princess after getting back to our asylum!
Exceedingly wonderful and terrible, O monarch, was the manner in which those heroes, unitedly and as separate bodies, then fought with Shalya.
Thou art, O child, versed in both religion and profit.
O thou of mighty arms, I am not truly one of the neuter sex, but I have adopted this vow of eunuchism from subservience to anothers will and from desire of religious merit.
Our prosperity is thy care and we are thy servants, O slayer of Madhu!
Slaying Duryodhana then, O son of Kunti, bestow the earth with her oceans upon Yudhishthira the just, like Vishnu (conferring the sovereignty of three worlds) upon the Lord of Sachi!
The jackal said, Hear, O mighty-armed one, what the mouse hath said.
And Damayanti although herself struck with amazement, smilingly addressed the warlike Nala who also gently smiled at her, saying, What art thou, O thou of faultless features, that hast come here awakening my love?
This reversal of the natural order of things, O good Brahmana, is seen everywhere in this world.
Hath my son Duryodhana, O Suta, who is ever desirous of victory, already gone to Yamas abode, despairing of success?
O thou of unfading glory, thou art all this.
O lord of celestials!
Then, O king, Dhrishtadyumna was quickly pierced with many arrows in his arms and chest by thy son fighting with his bow.
Thus addressed by queen Draupadi, the king, O chief of Bharatas race, summoned all the leaders of his forces to his presence and told them,--Cause my army, teeming with cars and elephants, to march out.
Then a breeze, delicious and fraught with pleasant perfumes, perfectly pure and delightfully cool, O Bharata, began to blow on that spot in consequence of the presence of the gods.
Let not that O Deity, be false which thou hadst at first promised to us.
Arjuna said,--If devotion, O Janardana, is regarded by thee as superior to work, why then, O Kesava, dost thou engage me in such dreadful work?
With the arrows, O monarch, that were shot in that battle, all the points of the compass became completely shrouded, so that the brave combatants could not distinguish the cardinal from the subsidiary points of the compass.
Meanwhile, the Sun went to his chambers in the western hills, and both the armies, O Bharata, slowly retired to their respective tents.
Hast thou never heard, O Bhishma, that reproach and glorification, both of self and others, are not practices of those that are respectable?
Speedily shall I cut off that bow of thine with a sharp shaft!--Saying this I shot at him, O bull of Bharatas race, a sharp broad-headed arrow, And cutting off one of the horns of his bow with it.
And honoured by him, O king, thou shall live happily in our home.
Both myself and Arjuna, O king, repeatedly beg thee for pardoning Vrikodara.
O foremost of all that are acquainted with the rules of morality, it is said that obedience to superior is ever meritorious.
The royal sage Dhritarashtra, however, restraining the grief that arises from folly, enquired of Yudhishthira the just, saying, ‘If, O son of Pandu, thou knowest it, tell me the number of those that have fallen in this battle, as also of those that have escaped with life!’ Yudhishthira answered, ‘One billion 660 million and 20,000 men have fallen in this battle.
O king, thou hast many sons some of whom are dearer to thee.
Then, O Janamejaya, that bull in the Bharata race, at the command of Yudhishthira the just marched against Sisupala of great energy.
Nothing can exceed it in depth, O Sutas son.
If, O thou of wicked soul, thou hadst given this bow to Keshava and become his driver, then Keshava could have (by this time) slain the fierce Karna like the lord of the Maruts (Sakra) slaying with his thunder the Asura Vritra.
After Karna had gone away, Kuntis son Yudhishthira retreated, borne, O sire, by the fleet steeds of Sahadeva.
Those car-warriors headed by Kripa, filled with grief, took leave of the king, O monarch, and went away to a place far removed from that spot.
Listen to me as I tell thee, O bull of the Bharata race, why Bhima goeth so.
The Pitris, then, learning what the child of their race was about, all came from their own region unto the Rishi and addressing him said: Aurva, O son, fierce thou hast been in thy asceticism.
The Gandharvas and diverse tribes of Apsaras are to be seen there, O king, assembled together and passing the time as happily as they like.
Searched have we closely, O king, on mountain tops and in inaccessible fastnesses, in various kingdoms and provinces teeming with people, in encampments and cities.
O great king, thou also wilt with thy kindred and relatives, so blaze forth in effulgence soon.
O Krishna, I accomplish to the best of my power whatever a person living in domesticity should do, regardless of the fact whether those acts have fruits or not.
And the Apsara, Menaka, O thou of the Bhrigu race, when her time was come, brought forth an infant near the hermitage of Sthulakesa.
This delightful assembly house of Kuvera that I have seen, attached to the firmament and capable of moving along it, is such, O king.
And Prishatas son (Dhrishtadyumna), that foremost of warriors, and Pandus son king Yudhishthira, the just, in the very sight, O Bharata, of both Drona and Gangas son, slew their army with sharp shafts capable of slaying hostile forces.
O thou of great splendour, when, however, Partha has pierced through thy division in the very sight, I regard my army to be very weak.
Therefore, O Dushmanta, cherish, O monarch, thy son born of Sakuntala.
And, O thou of excellent eyes, we also desire to become thy sons.
Let thy doubt, therefore, O Krishna, be dispelled like mist.
And many, uttering terrible sounds, ran hither and thither, and many, O king, uttered cries of pain.
The valiant Sahadeva then, O monarch, filled with rage, fixed on his bow-string a terrible shaft resembling the Destroyer himself and forcibly drawing the bow, he sped that shaft at thy son.
The loss of kingdom, of friends, and of children, O Bharata, and such as these, overtake him who is still under the influence of desire.
Listen, O Ruru, to the account of the destruction of snakes at the sacrifice of Janamejaya in days of yore, and the deliverance of the terrified reptiles by that best of Dwijas, Astika, profound in Vedic lore and might in spiritual energy.
Why, O amiable damsel, dost thou weep?
Then that foremost of all speakers, addressing Yudhishthira, said, O, Yudhishthira, O thou of mighty arms, knowing by spiritual insight what is passing in thy heart, I have come to thee, O thou bull among men!
O son of Devaki, thy form also, as the Lord of the universe, then became known to me!
Vinsas son, O Bharata, was the auspicious Vivinsa.
Beholding those diverse-looking darts approach me from all sides, like long tongues of fire and blazing forth with fierce energy Bhishma said, Next morning, O king, when the sun rose brightly, the combat between myself and him of Bhrigus race, again, commenced.
Arise, O king, and fight, for thou art a Kshatriya born of a noble race!
I say this to thee truly.--Hearing, O king, these words of Gautama, and paying him due honours, the king proceeded thither where the ruler of the Madra was.
The army of Dhritarashtras son, O Madhava, which was vast as the ocean, hath, O Achyuta, become, after encountering ourselves, even like the indent caused by a cows hoof!
His aged parents then addressed him thus, Rise, O man of piety, rise, may righteousness shield thee; we are much pleased with thee for thy piety; mayst thou The fowler replied, O good Brahmana, Brahmanas are worthy of all respect from me.
The gods said, Gathering all forms that may be found in the three worlds and taking portions of each, we will each, O Lord of the gods, construct a car of great energy for thee.
Yudhishthira said, Think, O king, daily of what is for my great good.
Indeed, they lie scattered on the earth like huge peaks of mountains Vaisampayana said, At the slaughter of Kichaka and brothers, people, O king, thinking of this terrible feat, were filled with surprise.
Having met the king thus, those brave chastisers of foes, before the sun rose, went away, O monarch, to the places they chose.
His life, O Sanjaya, is not vain on whom all creatures depend for their sustenance, like birds repairing to a tree abounding with ripe fruits.
O thou of wicked soul, be a man!
And I went to him, O king, with a cow placed in the van of my train, and accompanied by many Brahmanas, and (ordinary) priests (of our family), and by others, resembling the very gods in splendour, employed by us on special occasions.
The strong-armed son of Pandu then, having walked round his brothers and round Dhaumya also, and taking trident-bearing Siva, the lord of all creatures, it is then, O child, that I will give thee all the celestial weapons.
They proceeded, O lord, towards the camp of the Pancalas within which everybody was asleep.
Having heard these words of his mother, Yudhishthira said, What thou, O mother, hast deliberately done, moved by compassion for the afflicted Brahmana, is, indeed, excellent Bhima will certainly come back with life, after having slain the cannibal, inasmuch as thou art, O mother, always compassionate unto Brahmanas.
Tell me, O sinless one, what more I am now to narrate.
Janamejaya said, After the soldiers had been arrayed thus in order of battle (on the field of Kurukshetra), what, O bull among Brahmanas, did the Kauravas then do, urged as they were by destiny itself?
Samvarta said, O lion among kings, thy fear of Sakra will soon be dispelled, and I shall soon remove this terrible pain by means of my magic lore (incantation); be calm and have no fear of being overpowered by India.
Indeed, the mighty-armed Bhishma, O king, desireth me not!
And the various couples of battling men and animals, of great prowess and armed with diverse kinds of weapons and possessed of great skill presented a beautiful sight, O king, over the field.
O son of Bhrigu, this king is renowned for his knowledge of the precepts of religion.
He, O mighty-armed one, is no other than myself, even Bhishma, that subjugator of hostile cities!
Indra said, O Jataveda (Agni), didst thou go to present Vrihaspati to Marutta according to my direction?
O king, it is not true that he is fallen who speaks not the truth when asked.
The wretch who doth not give to others their due, who is of wicked soul, who is ungrateful, and shameless, should, O king, be avoided.
Those brave combatants, O monarch, loyal to Duryodhana, twanging their bows loudly, fought with the Pandavas.
And from that time, O king, those monarchs who from ignorance of this, desire to subjugate king Nilas city, are consumed by Hutasana (Agni).
Dhritarashtra said, These words, O Vidura, then thou hast spoken in this assembly, with reference to the Pandavas and myself, are for their good but not for ours.
Thus, O king, they lived (in that mansion) very guardedly, deceiving Purochana by a show of trustfulness and contentment while in reality they were trustless and discontented.
Dhritarashtra said, The feat, O Sanjaya, that Bhima achieved seems to be incredible, since my son who was struck down possessed the strength of 10,000 elephants.
Then the chief of the Pancalas, and the sons of Draupadi, O sire, and the twins, and Yuyudhana, uniting together, proceeded against Karna.
He is able to go to the abode of the solar deity, of the lunar deity, and of Siva, O king.
When we are here, O giver of honours, it seems to be highly improper that the king should himself go to battle to fight, as if he had none to fight for him.
O infamous one of the Kuru race, desiring to praise Kesava, thou describest him before me as great and superior in knowledge and in age, as if I knew nothing.
Therefore, O blessed one, go back thither unto Bhishmas presence.
57 Sanjaya said, Then Duryodhana, O chief of Bharatas, repairing to Karna, said unto him as also unto the ruler of the Madras and the other lords of Earth present there, these words, Without seeking hath this occasion arrived, when the gates of heaven have become wide open.
Horsemen engaged with car-warriors, and elephants with horsemen, and foot-soldiers with elephants and horsemen with horsemen, O bull of Bharatas race.
And, O monarch, all of them went together to Ilwala after this!
And then reassuring Kuntis son having truth for prowess, he also said, Even if, O Bharata, ye range this (entire) earth in your proper forms none in the three worlds shall recognise you.
O bull among men, enough of this joke!
O handsome one, select thou another husband now,--one who will not make thee a slave by gambling.
Setting out towards the Sarasvati, he visited all the sacred places along her course, accompanied by priests, friends, and many foremost of Brahmanas, as also with cars and elephants and steeds and servants, O bull of Bharatas race, and with many vehicles drawn by kine and mules and camels.
He cometh, O Karna, desirous of an encounter with thee, slaying, as he cometh, our chief warriors.
Tell me this, O best of regenerate persons.
O best of victors, how fortunately hast thou spent the term of thy residence in the wilderness, O king, O lord of monarchs, it was an exceedingly hard task that thou hast performed by dwelling in the wilderness together with thy brothers and this noble lady here.
And Ilwala repeatedly said, Come out, O Vatapi!
I do not, however, blame thee, O king, for having struck an innocent person.
Do that now, O lord of Earth, by which the mighty and the high-souled sons of Kunti, of prowess incapable of being baffled, may be prevented from exterminating the remnant of my host.
O lord, bless me, wishing me victory!
And, O king, the Pandavas soon found out the object of their search ceaselessly discharging arrows from the bow.
Arise, O king, and fight us, O Suyodhana!
Yudhishthira said, By good luck, O Suyodhana, thou knowest the duties of a Kshatriya!
Sanjaya said, Hear, O king, with patience, of the destruction of human bodies and the loss of elephants and steeds, as I describe (to thee) the battle.
They, however, O Krishna, shall also meet with destruction today!
If without sacrificing your interests I can obtain peace, O king, an act of great religious merit will be mine, productive of great fruits.
O thou best of the Rakshasas, falsehood is never respected in this world.
Listen to them, O monarch!
Thou wilt not, O monarch, come to any grief from that best of regenerate persons, owing to any act of mine.
Thinking that that was the time for gratifying his animosity towards, as he thought, the wicked-souled Partha, he quickly entered into Karnas quiver, O king, in the form of an arrow.
Their commander, however, the brave and valiant ruler of the Madras, that chastiser of foes, then protected, O monarch, those troops in that battle.
And thus, O bull of the Bharata race, the earth, to the very coasts of the ocean, became filled with men that were all long-lived.
Then, O king, commenced a terrible and awful battle.
O bull among men, I do not desire to live deprived of thy company.
Why then, O chief of Bharata’s race, this exceedingly dejected aspect?
Then Vasudeva, approaching Yudhishthira who was exceedingly melancholy and filled with anxiety, and who hung down his head and knew not what to do in consequence of his deep affliction, said unto him these words: Vasudeva said, O Yudhishthira the just, why dost thou sanction this unrighteous act, since thou permittest the head of the insensible and fallen Duryodhana whose kinsmen and friends have all been slain to be thus struck by Bhima with his foot.
Do thou, O mighty bowman, O Karna, see Dhritarashtra, and the illustrious Gandhari, as the bearer of the thunderbolt did Aditi.
If, indeed, O Yudhishthira, Duryodhana select thee for battle, or Arjuna, or Nakula, or Sahadeva (what will be the consequence)?
37 Vaishampayana said, Then Valadeva, O king, proceeded to Vinasana where the Sarasvati hath become invisible in consequence of her contempt for Sudras and Abhiras.
Dhritarashtra said, Whom hast thou, O Sanjaya, seen to have, from affection, arrived there, and who will, on behalf of the Pandavas, fight my sons forces?
O father, are there in the firmament or in heaven any worlds for me to enjoy?
O foremost of all Adhyaryus, tell me in detail what the cause was for undertaking such a mission!
O thou foremost of Bhrigus race, I desire to listen to all this, waiting respectfully on thee, O thou of excellent vows!
And it is there, O Bharata, that she is known to have become a river, filled only during the rainy seasons, abounding with crocodiles, crooked in her course, and destitute of easy access to her water.
Vaishampayana said, Formerly, O tiger among kings, the high-souled Rama (the son of Dasaratha) lived (for some time) in the forest of Dandaka, from desire of slaying the Rakshasas.
To control speech, O king, is said to be most difficult.
Today I shall free myself from the debt I owe to the many illustrious Kshatriyas (that have fallen for me), to Bahlika and Drona and Bhishma and the high-souled Karna, to the heroic Jayadratha and Bhagadatta, to Shalya the ruler of the Madras and Bhurishrava, to my sons, O chief of Bharatas race, and Shakuni the son of Subala, to all my friends and well-wishers and kinsmen!
Sanjaya said, They had not proceeded far, O king, when they stopped, for they beheld a dense forest abounding with trees and creepers.
As regards thee, it is ordained that thou shalt go thither in this very body of thine.’ Yudhishthira said, ‘This dog, O lord of the Past and the Present, is exceedingly devoted to me.
And this Dhritarashtra said, Tell me, O Sanjaya, how that great bowman Drona and the Panchala prince of Prishatas race encounter each other in battle, each striving his best.
It has been composed by the ascetic Krishna, O Brahmana, of truthful speech.
Beholding that force (within which Duryodhana was), three mighty car-warriors prepared themselves for assailing it, for Bhimasena and Arjuna and Sahadeva, O sire, together proceeded against it with loud leonine roars from desire of slaying Duryodhana.
Thus, O monarch, that slayer of foes, that mighty bowmen, Karna, having slain foot, horse, car-warriors, and elephants, stood there on his car.
O king, that lord of the earth who hath his dominions on the west and the south, who is thy maternal uncle and who is called Purujit, that brave perpetuator of the Kunti race, that slayer of all foes, is the single king that regardeth thee from affection.
Narada said, Repairing at my will to the mansion of Sakra, I have seen Sakra the lord or Sachi; and there, O royal sage.
Then the mighty Savyasaci, the son of Pandu, beholding a remnant of thy army still keeping their ground, became filled with rage, O king.
Thou art indeed, O daughter, in consequence of my prowess, worshipped thrice a day during the ordained hours of prayer, by Brahmanas, the gods with Indra, the Vasus, the Aswins, the Asuras, in fact, by the whole universe.
And terrible creatures, gorging on flesh and drinking fat, and blood, O Bharata, began to dance around.
Then the son of Radha and Sakuni, O king, addressing Dhritarashtra, that foremost of monarchs, said, O Kaurava, our cattle-stations are now in a delightful place.
If thou dost not cast me off, I cannot, O Brahmana, be taken away by force.
O fie!
Then, O king, great fear entered the heart of Karna at sight of Bhimas prowess which resembled that of the Destroyer himself unto living creatures.
Vaisampayana continued, When all the Kauravas utterly routed and vanquished, set out in a dejected mood for Hastinapura, Falguna, on his way back, addressed Uttara, saying, O prince, O hero of mighty arms, seeing the kine escorted in advance of us by the cowherds, we shall enter Viratas metropolis in the afternoon, having tended the steeds with drink and a bath.
O thou of magnanimous heart, tell me what is thou deemest to be beneficial for Ajatasatru and what is productive of good to the Kurus.
Where hath that vast army of thine now gone, O best of monarchs?
If, however thou seekest anything else, O Bharata tell us, O tiger among men, so that we may do thy bidding.
Grant us permission, O queen!
Do tell me, O Saivya, if that excellent lady is of the human kind.
Then, O king, within a month, were born a full hundred sons unto Dhritarashtra and a daughter also in excess of this hundred.
Today is the eighteenth day, O Janardana, of this great battle that is raging between the two sides!
Therefore, O thou of sweet smiles, steadily keeping virtue before thy eyes, and duly observing holy vows, summon thou the god of justice and virtue by the help of thy solicitations and incantations.
Casting off his body he soon followed her, moved by sorrow, O chief of Bharatas race, and forced to it by her beauty.
The high-souled Valadeva, observant of rigid vows, gave away unto the Brahmanas much wealth and plentiful sacrificial presents, O king, in diverse sacred spots.
Aided by my knowledge, O sire, I know the slayer of Madhu to be the union of the Gross, the subtle and the Cause; and that He is the Creator of all, but is Himself increate; and also that, endued with Divinity, it is He from whom everything springs and it is He unto whom all things return.
Even this, O Janardana, is Vaisampayana said, Reflecting (for a moment), with eyes red in anger, he, of Dasarhas race, addressing Duryodhana in that assembly of the Kurus, then said these words, Wishest thou for a bed of heroes?
Praise thou, O Bhishma, this Karna, the ruler of the territories of Anga and Vanga, who is equal in strength unto him of a thousand eyes, who draweth a large bow, who endued with mighty arms owneth celestial ear-rings of heavenly make with which he was born and this coat of mail possessing the splendour of the rising sun, who vanquished in a wrestling encounter the invincible Jarasandha equal unto Vasava himself, and who tore and mangled that monarch.
Vasuki, the king of the snakes, O tiger among men, gave unto the son of Agni two snakes named Jaya and Mahajaya.
Having heard it, thou shouldst act according to it, O foremost of all regenerate persons.
And Yudhishthira said,--How can, O Sakuni, a king like me, always observant of the uses of his own order, refuse, when summoned to dice?
Firmly resolved that I am on battle, grant me thy permission, O hero!
At the close of that conversation Vyasa of great energy, that foremost of eloquent men, that first of all persons conversant with the Vedas, highly gratified, addressed the blind monarch and once more said,--Burning as thou art with grief on account of thy children, I know, O king of kings, what object is cherished by thee in thy heart.
Stop thy tears, I swear to thee, O Krishna, soon wilt thou see thy husbands, with their enemies slain, and with prosperity crowning them.
And the impetuosity, O king, of that army thus rallied to the fight resembled that of the surging sea at the moment of the moons rise.
After the wielder of the thunderbolt, O king, had departed, a shower of celestial flowers of sweet fragrance fell there, O chief of Bharatas race!
Then amid all the warriors the eldest son of Pandu, loudly exclaimed,--He who will choose us, him we shall choose for our ally!--Casting his eyes then upon them, Yuyutsu said these words, with a cheerful heart, unto Kuntis son king Yudhishthira the Just,--I will fight under thee in battle, for the sake of you all, with the sons of Dhritarashtra, if, O king, thou wilt accept me, sinless one.
Even such a man should, O chief of the Bharatas, recite the Bharata.
The one that is the stronger of the pair is bearing his burthen of greater weight (with ease), but, O Vasava, the other is lean, and weak and is a mass of veins and arteries!
Even this, O mighty armed one, is what I also like.
Yudhishthira answered, O thou foremost of the regenerate ones, at thy command I will certainly act according to all the instructions thou hast given me, and which, O lord, are all so sweet to the ear.
Hearing these agreeable words of Bhimasena, O monarch, Kuntis son, Ajatasatru, became, with all his brothers, filled with joy.
If, O Sanjaya, thou art about to be stained with infamy and I do not (from affection) tell thee anything, then that affection, worthless and unreasonable, would be like that of the she-asss for her young.
One like thee, O Suyodhana, that has adopted Kshatriya duties, should not act in this way!
The Bharata Vaisampayana, said, Hearing that the Pandavas were near, that crusher of The Pandavas then, uniting with the Vrishnis according to the usual formalities, together entered, O king, the city named after the elephant.
O foremost of kings, beholding thee, O first of men, great hath been our happiness.
Set right thy sons, O thou of Kurus race, and I will set the Pandavas right.
Filled, O Bharata, with pity (at the sight), I stopped of my own accord and said,--Oh, fie on battle!
When many headless forms, O king, had thus risen up, when the scent of blood had made the combatants nearly senseless, and when the loud noise had somewhat subsided, Subalas son (once more) approached the large host of the Pandavas, with the small remnant of his horse.
Do thou, O king, listen to the message of the Lord of the Celestials.
The Kuru army, O thou of the race of Kuru, encountering the proud Pandavas endued with great strength, skilled in smiting, and possessed of sureness of aim, became weakened and agitated like a herd of she-deer frightened at a forest conflagration.
Do thou accomplish all, O Partha, that Krishna has said.
O puissant one.
Deeply pierced by Vrishasena in that battle, O king, Pandus son Nakula, that foremost of men, endued with great activity, became filled with rage and rushed in that encounter against the son of Karna from desire of slaying him.
Thy daughter, O monarch, hath like a lotus been transferred only from one lake into another.
Even now, O king, art thou attacked by decrepitude.
O Naishadha, I daily recollect thee and am even waiting for thee, since I derive no pleasure from gambling with those that are not connected with me by blood.
O best of men, let the king, O great Rishi, protected by thee, visit the various places of pilgrimage and give away unto Brahmanas in charity.
These fair ladies, in successive bevies, O king, came out, filled with sorrow, and ran hither and thither like a herd of fillies on a circus yard.
O beautiful lady, do thou choose one of them for thy lord.
For all that, O mighty-armed one, I shall address the certain words that are for my good!
Arjuna said,--Thou applaudest, O Krishna, the abandonment of actions, and again the application (to them).
With headless trunks smeared all over with blood with severed limbs and heads and hips, the Earth looks, O best of the Bharatas, like an altar strewn with extinguished fires.
Similarly, thy warriors, O monarch, covered the great car-warriors of the Pandavas with dense showers of arrows from every side.
But, O Agni, grieve not for it.
Then wounded with shafts sped from bows drawn to their fullest stretch the two warriors, O king, looked resplendent like flowering Kinsukas.
But I do not seek to renounce thee, wherefore, O timid one, dost thou dread this?
Saying these words, O monarch, Sahadeva of great strength, that tiger among men, filled with rage, rushed impetuously against Shakuni.
And he said, In order that, O Bharata, peace may be established between the Kurus and the Pandavas without a slaughter of the heroes, I have come hither.
42 43 Sanjaya said, That chastiser of foes, viz., the son of Radha, thus silencing the ruler of the Madras, once more addressed him, O monarch, saying these words, In answer to that which, O Shalya, thou hast said unto me by way of instance, I tell thee that I am incapable of being frightened by thee in battle with thy words.
Seeing Drona slain in battle, the weapons of many of them, O king, dyed with blood, dropped from their hands.
And, O king, the Pandavas also, accompanied by Drona and Kripa and Bhishma, returned to their abodes.
He who, solicited in secret by a woman full of desire and in season, goeth not in unto her, loseth virtue and is called by the learned a killer of the embryo, O son of Bhrigu, for these reasons, and anxious to avoid sin, I went into Sarmishtha.
With a broad-headed arrow, he then, O sire, cut off the bow of Sahadeva.
Having proceeded far, they beheld a banyan, O sire, under whose shade they stopped, greatly tired, and exceedingly anxious about the king and indulging in such thoughts as these, The mighty son of Dhritarashtra, having solidified the waters of the lake, lay stretched at the bottom.
I desire to hear this, O Brahmana, for the curiosity I feel is great.
I will not, O king of the Panchalas, discourse on this before you all.
There, the Pancalas, afraid of Karna, are flying away, O Janardana.
Hearing these words, both Gandhari and Dhritarashtra said unto Keshava that slayer of Keshi, these words: Go, quickly, O mighty-armed one, protect the Pandavas!
Thou, O Bharata.
O child, destroy not the Kshatriyas nor the seven worlds.
All the great bowmen among the Dhartarashtras also, O best of men, applauded Karna, that foremost of great car-warriors, that first of all bowmen.
The wrath of Bhishma, O thou of the splendour of Indra, of Drona, and the king Yudhishthira, will consume the whole world, like a comet of large proportions falling transversely on the earth.
Bhimasena of great strength and thy son, O monarch, both with uplifted maces (in their arms), worshipped Valadeva.
Surely, O best of Brahmanas, he did not fight again with the Yakshas.
Having said these words unto the king, he addressed Madhava, saying, Without doubt, O Krishna, I will slay Karna in battle today.
Hearing this, Yudhishthira said, Thou hast no fear., O Uluka!
Do thou, O auspicious one, know me for Yama.
Having said these words then, why, O Duhsasana, dost thou fly from battle now?
The hope became strong, O king, in the breasts of thy sons that, after Drona and Bhishma and the Sutas son had been overthrown, Shalya, O sire, would slay all the Parthas in battle.
None are more powerful than Brahmanas and knowing duly, as I do, the power of Brahmanas, I do not, O Sakra, desire to come in conflict with Samvarta.
Yudhishthira said, Rise, rise, O son of Gandhari, and fight me, Suyodhana!
Markandeya continued, At these words of Vamadeva, O king, that Thus asked by them, Markandeya answered, The royal sage Vaka is a great ascetic and endowed with long life.
Vaisampayana continued, Hearing these words uttered by Vasudeva, all the kings (there present), O Bharata, without saying anything, looked at Yudhishthiras face.
The next day, O king, the remnant of that caravan left the place bewailing the destruction that had overtaken them and lamenting for their dead brothers and fathers and sons and friends.
Today, even this will be known to all the Kshatriyas including the very children, O Suta, that Bhimasena hath succumbed in battle or that, alone, he hath subjugated all the Kurus!
These virtues, however, cannot be attained by one that hath no wealth, even if, O tiger among men, he may have infinite other accomplishments.
In days of yore, in the Krita age, O king, all celestials, duly approaching Varuna, said unto him these words, As Shakra, the Lord of the celestials, always protects us from every fear, similarly be thou the Lord of all the rivers!
Dhritarashtra replied, The chase of the deer, as also the examination of cattle is very proper, O child!
Behold, O bull among kings, the Asuras, though elder brothers in possession of power and affluence, were all vanquished by the gods through stratagem.
Whatever be thy command, O king, it behoveth thy sons with their followers to obey it.
It was I however, O lady, who regulated their number and framed the rules to be observed in respect of them; and it was I who had to listen to all complaints about them.
O hero, to-day this wonder of my heart is very great, that thou remaining by his side, Rama should have encountered Ravana personally.
And having beheld that goddess, youthful and lovely, standing before her, Indras queen, glad at heart, paid respects to them and said, I desire to know who thou art, O thou of lovely face.
Vaisampayana said, Great was the uproar, at that time, O king, of both men and women standing on the terraces of mansions or on the Earth.
O child, O thou foremost of all monarchs, this Sisupala possessed of little intelligence is desirous of taking along with him all these kings, through the agency of him who is the soul of the universe, to the regions of Yama.
Let no scruple, be thine as regards this, O thou that art fully acquainted with every duty.
He who was the cause of these hostilities and who fomented them by means of his guile, that wretched wight fond of deception, lieth, struck down, on the bare ground, O lord of earth!
Then, O sinless prince!
Vaisampayana said, After the soldiers, O bull of the Bharata race, had been arrayed thus in order of battle, Dhritarashtra, O, king, said these words to Sanjaya.
That place cannot be reached by vehicles, O Vrikodara.
And Bhima dwelt there, O king, for thirty nights, duly entertained by Sisupala.
Do thou tell me this, O lord.
Then Srutarvan, filled with rage, took up his bow and struck Bhimasena in that battle, O king, with many arrows on his arms and chest.
Hear, O king, what those two sinful wretches, Ekata and Dwita, said while conversing with each other!
Remembering that it was for thee that the wicked Vidura was driven (by us) and that we had tried to burn you all in the house of lac, be a man now; at the time of Krishnas setting out (from Upaplavya) for the Kuru court, thou deprived of life, on the earth, embracing thy mace, O Bharata!
This, O Brahmana, that thou hast enquired of me is only the result of self discipline.
Vaisampayana continued, When the illustrious slayer of Paka refused to ask for any other boon, Kama with a smile again addressed him, saying, O god of gods, even before this, I had recognised thee, O Lord!
Endued with great energy, Jalasandha, O king, is one of thy foremost of Rathas.
O thou of prowess incapable of being baffled, he is thy disciple and friend.
Vaisampayana said, Hear, O king, what those descendants of Kuru did while they dwelt thus in disguise in the city of the Matsyas, worshipping the king thereof.
Of austere vows, he will give us counsel, Sanjaya continued, Hearing these words, O king, he of Vrishnis race said unto Yudhishthira, O thou of great wisdom, these words of thine, O king, are to my taste.
The king and the queen, and Vidura and others, O Bharata, having bathed in the sacred stream, performed the usual rites of religion.
This is generally the behaviour of Kshatriyas in battle, O king, and this Vrikodara is devoted to battle and the practices of Kshatriyas.
O sinless one, thou art afflicting all creatures by thy hard penances.
And, O bull of the Bharata race, the princes then, taking Drupada with them after having seized him on the field of battle along with his friends and counsellors, offered him unto Drona.
And, O Bharata, overwhelmed with grief, and washing her face, she sent her two children with Kesini.
He will, in fierce battle, cast away for thy sake his very life with all, his troops possessed of great prowess and acquainted with all the modes of warfare, he will, O king, fight fearlessly with thy foes in battle.
Dhritarashtra said, I do not feel great pain, O Sanjaya!
Do thou, O lord, grant them security.
O Bharata, we desire to remain always in obedience to thee.
Rallying them then, O monarch, thy son, resolved on battle and desirous of gladdening them, addressed those warriors, saying, I do not see that spot on plain or mountain whither, if you fly, the Pandavas will not slay you.
Proceed, O charioteer, with speed, borne by these steeds.
O son of Pandu, O king Yudhisthira, come and cast the dice.
If, O king, we have ever said or done anything in ignorance to offend thee, it behoveth thee to forgive us.
All this, O thou of ascetic wealth, I desire to hear in detail.
And now, O Arjuna, if it pleases thee, do thou go to that high-minded prince and tell him of my intention to depart from this place.
Exercising my reason, O Madhava, and reflected in my own mind, O thou of Vrishnis race, thinking of Viduras words, and taking into account the acts of the wicked-souled Duryodhana himself, I have come to this conclusion!
It is for this thou livest yet, O monarch, although thou hast offended me in battle.
Sanjaya continued, The warrior, O king, thus clad in mail on the field of battle, adored the thousand-rayed Aditya as he rose at morn.
O thou foremost of male Beings, know that we have ever been firm in truth and morality.
O foremost of kings, I should be further instructed by thee.
That male person, who being solicited by a woman in her season doth not grant her wishes, is called, O Brahmana, by those conversant with the Vedas, a slayer of the embryo.
Thou regardest, O Prince, as a great blessing what will bring in its train the terrible consequences of war.
Indeed, the recitation of this history dispelleth all fear of snakes Sauti continued, O Brahmanas, O foremost one of Bhrigus race, as thy ancestor Pramati had cheerfully narrated unto his inquiring son Ruru, and as I had heard it, thus have I recited this blessed history, from the beginning, of the learned Astika.
I do not censure the son of Sini or the son of Hridika, O Arjuna.
Beholding that chastiser of foes made steedless and driverless, Kripa, O king, rushed at that bull of Sinis race, desirous of despatching him to Yamas abode.
Having on a single car fought in battle many mighty car-warriors with the preceptor (Drona) on their head, Satyaki cometh to thee, O Partha!
Illustrious persons like thee never indulge in sorrow, O smiter of foes!
Then, O king, mayest thou hope to live for some time with thy younger brothers.
The gods said, We will not be able, O Maheswara, to bear half of thy energy.
And, O lord of men, as those mighty heroes were entering the mountain Gandhamandana, there arose a violent wind, attended with a heavy shower.
O king of kings, it hath been said that a Vaisya may ask one boon; a Kshatriya lady, two boons; a Kshatriya male, three, and a Brahmana, a hundred.
Struck by one another, the combatants of both armies, O king, began to fall down, wailing aloud for their (deceased) kinsmen.
O lord of the earth, O bull of the Bharata race, thou knowest what form of rule these Kshatriyas, guided by the instructions traditionally handed down from generation to generation, have established amongst their own order, and how far they are competent to perform the Rajasuya sacrifice.
Sanjaya said, When Indras son Arjuna, O sinless one, began, with his excellent arrows, to break and incessantly slay that force of ours many heroes were either slain, or becoming dispirited, fled away.
O tiger of Bhrigus race, immediately on seeing the light, that son of Vinata left his mother.
O Bhima, what king is there on earth that would dare abuse me thus, as this wretch of his race, already possessed by Death, hath done to-day?
Thus hundreds of combats, O monarch, that were fierce and beautiful, took place between thy men and the enemy, on diverse parts of the field.
I feel restless in my heart, O lovely damsels.
Those two foremost of men, both accomplished in weapons, as they incessantly aimed and shot innumerable arrows, O king, displayed diverse kinds of beautiful manoeuvres.
Thou shalt wander over the Earth, O thou of sinful soul, with the weight of all diseases on thee.
Amongst elephants, amongst steeds, amongst cars and amongst men, the Sutas son caused a very great carnage, O tiger among men.
Before their confidence in king Drupada--that bull amongst kings--is established we may succeed, O monarch, to encounter them.
What else can be said, O king, than that monarchs sovereignty was dependent on destiny?
Accepting those words (of Duryodhana), the foremost of car-warriors stationed on his car, viz., the son of Radha, addressed Shalya, that warrior accomplished in battle, saying, Urge the steeds, O mighty-armed one, so that I may slay Dhananjaya and Bhimasena and both the twins and king Yudhishthira.
It seemeth, O Bhishma, that all these teachings hath been thrown away by thee.
Beholding him stand there with uplifted mace like the crested mountain of Kailasa, Bhimasena, O monarch, addressed him, saying, Call to thy mind all those wrongs that king Dhritarashtra and thyself have done unto us!
O amiable one, my heart also inclineth that very way of which thou tellest me.
O wretch of thy race, today I shall destroy thy desire of battle!
O terrible one, thou resistest even as the fire that destroys everything at the time of the Universal Dissolution.
And after he had approached the king, Dhritarashtra of great energy, the son of Amvika, addressed him, saying, From my good luck alone, O Vidura, thou, O sinless one, of conversant with morality, hast come here remembering me!
Even this is my grief, O charioteer, that king Yudhishthira the just should have gone away, leaving me in the midst of the enemy.
Without them by me I do not wish to go to Heaven, O lord of all the deities.
O king of Magadha, we challenge thee.
Achieving such a feat, O king, the ruler of the Madras speedily mounted on the splendid car of Kritavarman.
The wielder of Gandiva, having said these words in wrath, recollected, however, the words, O Bharata, of his eldest brother.
Delicate and brave, devoted to the king, and always worshipping his elder brother, do thou, O Panchali, feed him thyself.
O, Bharata of mighty arms, thyself shalt, in righteousness, beget upon me children endued with great energy.
Sanjaya said, Arjuna then, O king, beholding the prowess of Bhishma in battle, addressed Sikhandin saying, Proceed towards the grandsire.
Markandeya said, When, O Yudhishthira, all this mystery of salvation was explained to that Brahmana, he was highly pleased and he said addressing the fowler, All this that thou hast explained, is rational, and it seems to me that there is nothing in connection with the mysteries of religion which thou dost not know.
And Prahlada said, Know, O child, these two truths with certainty, viz., that might is not always meritorious and forgiveness also is not always meritorious!
What shall I do, O aunt?
O slayer of foes, blinded by temptation and the desire of enjoyment, for the sake of gold, the king destroyed at the same time both his present and future gains.
Once on a time, O scorcher of foes, an intelligent disciple questioned a certain Brahmana of rigid vows who was his preceptor, as he was seated (at his ease), saying,--What, indeed, is the highest good?
Having achieved the most difficult feat in the midst of the (Kaurava) troops, the mighty Satyaki, desirous of obtaining thy sight cometh to thee, O son of Pandu!
How, O son of Radha, when thou art alive will Phalguna succeed in slaying the ruler of the Sindhus before the sun goes to the Asta hills?
Covering him first, O bull of Bharatas race, with a hundred arrows, Arjuna then slew all the steeds of that bowman.
O, conform to virtuous practice.
O chastiser of foes, thou protectest the Vrishnis in all their calamities, do thou now protect the Pandavas also from a great danger, for they deserve thy protection.
Therefore, O uncle, know me now as deeply grieved and filled with jealousy, and speak of it to Dhritarashtra.
Have I not been thus deceived by her, I fear, O king, that she will soon surpass me in the number of her children.
The valiant son of Bharadwaja, that great bowman endued with mighty strength, that hero born in an excellent Upon the slaughter, O king, of Vrihatkshatra, that mighty car-warrior among the Kaikeyas, the son of Sisupala, filled with rage, addressed his charioteer, saying, O charioteer, proceed to the spot where Drona stayeth, clad in armour and engaged in slaying the Kaikeya and the Panchala hosts.
I had out of love duly shown unto Bhimasena; and I had also said unto that hero, If thou canst find many of this species, procuring even all of them, do thou return speedily,--O Pandava, that mighty armed one, with the view of gratifying my desire, may have gone towards son of the Wind-god may not be far away; and on Bhima coming up at the next moment, the Rakshasa will not live.
Thus checked in that battle by the ruler of the Madras, O Bharata, those slayers of foes became unable to stay in front of Shalya.
Thereupon, O king, ashes, white as snow, came out of that wound.
Even thus those receptacles of water, O king, were formed in Naimisha.
O best of men, tell me that, for thou art possessed of great wisdom and art skilled in narration!
In all those arts that exists in this world, and also in every thing difficult of accomplishment, I will strive to attain success, O Rituparna, do thou maintain me.
Phalguna, who was careful in observing every duty, having caused this duty to be performed, proceeded, O chief of Bharata’s race, next to the place where the Vrishnis were slaughtered.
Yudhishthira said, How is it, O Duryodhana, that thou hadst not this knowledge when many great car-warriors, uniting together, slew Abhimanyu in battle?
Who again, O king, can defeat in battle the Kurus who are protected by Drona and Bhishma, and Aswatthaman, and Salya, and Kripa and Karna with a host of Kshatriya kings?
And, O monarch, king Sisupala endued with great energy, hath placed himself under his protection and hath become the generalissimo of his forces.
Awful, O monarch, was the noise made by those rushing warriors, resembling that of the agitated ocean.
And it hath been heard by me, O king, that, though hurled from heaven, Yayati, without reaching the surface of the Earth, stayed in the firmament.
Therefore, O Govinda, O thou of long arms, install thyself at that sacrifice; for, O thou of the Dasarha race, if thou performed the sacrifice, I shall be cleansed of sin.
O child, let that be acceptable to thee.
It is the truth, O Nala, that I speak unto thee.
As regards myself, I am willing to fight either Sahadeva, or Bhima, or Nakula, or Phalguna, or thee today, O bull of Bharatas race!
The Kauravas, O monarch, like snakes without poison, took Karnas shelter, moved by the fear of the wielder of Gandiva.
Like a flower-seller that plucketh (many flowers) in the garden from trees that he cherisheth with affection from day to day, continue, O Bharata, to pluck flowers day by day from the Pandavas.
In uttering this curse, O thou of excellent vows, thou hast aided me in the accomplishment of that task.
With these words, O tiger among kings, Vrikodara of great energy, armed with mace, stood for fight, like Shakra challenging the asura Vritra.
Yayati then said, I solicit the boon, O Brahmana, that by so doing, the sin of begetting a half-breed might not touch me.
As regards the blind old king, now become child, thou, O foremost of men, with those heroes, the sons of Pandu, hast become his refuge!
The remaining kings, possessed of great courage, clad in mail, stood in the array, each in the position assigned to him, according to the measure of his enthusiasm and resolution, O Bharata.
Going from this world, O monarch, and meeting with those mighty car-warriors (that have preceded thee), show thy regards to them, at my request, one after another, according to the order of their rank and years.
Similarly, Vatapi and Ilwala, and Trisiras, O lord, and the Asuras Sunda and Upasunda, were all slain by the aid of means!
O foremost of kings, I do not say this falsely.
With thee, O Govinda, we have no hostility, no war.
Sanjaya continued, Having said these words, O sinless one, thy son Duryodhana, with his brothers, made Karna the generalissimo (of the Kuru army).
Sauti said, Listen, O ye Brahmanas, to the sacred descriptions I utter O ye best of men, ye deserve to hear of the place known as Samanta-panchaka.
Thou laughedest at Krishna while she stood in the midst of the assembly, scantily dressed because in her season and obedient to Duhshasanas will, whither, then, O Karna, had this virtue of thine gone?
Therefore, O thou of the fairest complexion, it behoveth thee to show me mercy, thinking me either as very silly or thy obedient slave.
The Pandavas, O monarch, with Dhrishtadyumna at their head, filled with rage, rushed against (the small remnant of) thy army.
Thou hast also, O Sanjaya, more than one friend who sympathise with thee in thy joys and woes, and who, O hero, never retreat from the field of battle.
superior to thy mother; therefore, thou, O Virochana, hath been defeated by Sudhanwan.
Then wonderful was the prowess that we behold of Bharadwajas son, and his lightness (of hand) in the use of weapons, as also the strength of his arms, O Bharata, in as much as, alone, he checked Prishatas son with a shower of arrows.
Arjuna said, My delusion hath been destroyed, and the recollection (of what I am) hath been gained by me, O Undeteriorating one, through thy favour.
O foremost of the Bharatas, beholding that beloved brother of thine, that bull among men, employed by Matsya in looking after his kine, I am filled with woe.
The queen replied, That, O great king, can never be untrue!
Do thou, O Janarddana, so order that I may be freed from this heinous sin and that my mind may be purified.
The courtesan said, O son of Kasyapa!
Dhritarashtra said, After having wept for the high-souled Bhishma of terrible prowess, what, O son, did the Kauravas, urged by fate, next do?
O most excellent Brahmana, so great is the number that I am unable to count them all.
Thou art the mother of the whole Universe; and thou again, O Agni, art its termination.
If thou hast any love for me, O perpetuator of Kurus race, do thou then, after having heard these instructions relating to the Soul, always act duly (according to them), O thou of excellent vows.
Tell me also, O foremost of speakers, who they were that invested him and who performed the actual rites, and how the celestial generalissimo made a great carnage of the Daityas!
Kunti said, Hearing these words of his mother the son said, O ruthless and wrathful mother, O thou that thinkest highly of martial heroism, thy heart is surely made of steel beat into that shape.
O bull of Bharatas race, what advantage Vaisampayana said, Hearing, O bull of Bharatas race, these words of Kesava, Bhishma, the son of Santanu, then said unto vindictive Duryodhana, Krishna hath spoken to thee, desirous of bringing about peace between kinsmen.
If to accept them as gift be improper for thee, then, O monarch, buy them for a straw?
With the gold-decked shafts that issued from the bow of the Madra king, the welkin, O monarch, became so filled that there was not an inch of empty space.
Thou shouldst not also, O Dhananjaya, slay the warriors of those kings who may come forth to fight thee, with all their kinsmen and friends.
Indeed, within those waters lay, O lord, that king, armed with his mace, who, O ruler of men, could not be vanquished by any man!
The mighty Bhimasena also, moved hither and thither by the horn of Karnas bow, was, O king, addressed in very harsh words such as Fool and Glutton.
O Vrikodara, disunions and disputes do take place amongst those that are connected in blood.
Then Duhshasana, O monarch, having cut off Sahadevas bow in that great battle, pierced Sahadeva himself with three and seventy arrows in the arms and the chest.
O Rishi, as a gift, however small, multiplieth in respect of its religious merits, so a sinful act multiplieth in respect of the woe it bringeth in its train.
Sanjaya continued, Govinda then said, Fie, fie, unto Partha and once more continued to say, I now know, O Partha, that thou hast not waited upon the old, since, O tiger among men, thou hast yielded to wrath at a time when thou shouldst not have done so.
11 Vaishampayana said, Beholding his sons, grandsons, and friends all slain in battle, the kings soul became overwhelmed with great grief, O Janamejaya!
Be thou truthful in speech, O king.
And, O protector of the earth!
Why then, O Krishna, hath this one, leaving Yudhishthira followed in my wake?
Dhritarashtra said, After the Kuru warrior Bhurisravas had been slain under those circumstances, tell me, O Sanjaya, how proceeded the battle.
Having endured a little misery first, from this time, O son of Kuru’s race, do thou sport with me in happiness, divested of grief and all thy ailments dispelled.
Hear, O son of Pandu, the diverse leonine roars coming from every side.
Unto the Brahmanas also, O chief of Bharata’s race, should, with due devotion and according to one’s power, be made large gifts and diverse kinds of gems, and kine, and vessels of white brass for milking kine, and maidens decked with every ornament, and possessed of every accomplishment suited to enjoyment, as also diverse kinds of conveyances, beautiful mansions, plots of land, and cloths.
Repairing unto the reverend son of Santanu, we will, O Bharata, ask him his advice and according to the advice that he will give us we will fight with the foe.
Desire and anger, O king, break through wisdom, just as a large fish breaks through a net of thin cords.
Sanjaya continued, Then thy son, O king, cased his body with armour made of gold, and put on a beautiful head-gear adorned with pure gold.
Now the King has repeatedly used those very words to me in thy presence, O hero, viz., Give thy bow.
Seeing those car-warriors of the Kaurava army, and understanding that the king, unwilling to fight, was staying within the waters, and hearing that conversation between those heroes and their master staying within the depths of the lake, indeed, O monarch, the huntsmen, clearly perceiving that it was Duryodhana who was staying within the lake, formed a resolution.
Others, again, O best of men, biting their nether lips, and with faces rendered terrible in consequence of the contraction of their brows, are surveying the field all around.
Arjuna then said, I will hold in check the whole army, O Kesava!
Dhritarashtra said, I have heard, O Sanjaya, all that thou hast said.
It was properly equipped and properly trained for battle, O king, by persons well-conversant with elephant-lore.
Then, O monarch, there came unto Dhritarashtra, Duryodhana and the son of Radha, Karna.
For our sake, O Krishna, thou hadst also to hear many harsh words and endure the fall, violent as the thunder, of weapons in battle!
O chastiser of foes, on one occasion, a Brahmana came to us from the regions of Heaven.
Do not loathe to do my bidding, O son.
Or, let, O king, some clever spies, repairing thither, secretly compass the death of Bhimasena.
Casting off thy body, O blessed one, thou shalt in heaven live with me!
Then Ashvatthama, O king, having heard those words from me, cast his eyes on that extensive lake and began to wail in grief, saying, Alas, alas, the king knows not that we are still alive!
And hearing that pledge of the truth-speaking Arjuna, the Kauravas then, O king, regained (the lost) tenor of their minds.
And, O king, the Kuru capital at the prospect of battle looked like the ocean on the appearance of the moon, with the vast crowds of humanity representing its waters with their eddies; the cars, elephants, and horses representing its fishes; the tumult of conchs and drums, its roar; the treasure-chests, its jewels and gems; the diverse kinds of ornaments and armour its waves; the bright weapons its white foam; the rows of houses the mountains on its beach; and the roads and shops, like lakes!
And, O foremost of conquerors, on all sides of that mountain, there exist mines of gold, resplendent as the rays of the sun.
If, O sinless one, I with my brothers deserve thy favour, it behoveth thee, O best of Munis, to dispel the doubt that is in my mind.
By good luck, thou growest, O son of Pandu!
Let the whole of my kingdom be thine today, O beautiful one!
Vasudevas son thereupon said, It beseems thee well, O Kuntis son, that thou measurest thyself with me.
Indeed, if it be not a secret, it behoveth thee, O chastiser of foes, to say it unto me.
Going unto the Kurus, make thou, O Lord, such a peace that all the sons of Bharata may live together with cheerful hearts and contentedly.
The understanding said, These arrows will not, O Alarka, cross through me at all.
Subalas son, however, of great valour, O king, prevailing over the Pandavas and longing for victory, began to slay their forces from the rear.
While Vrikodara, O monarch, was uttering these words in a loud voice, thy fearless son of true prowess answered him, saying, What use of such elaborate bragging?
O foremost of speakers, tell me now, O Suta, who are yet alive in my army after the death of all the foremost heroes!
Whither, O son of Radha, had this virtue of thine gone?
O bull among men, tell me truly about thee.
Then the Pandavas, O king, and the Kauravas also, mighty car-warriors all, striking one another, began to mangle one another with their keen shafts.
Behold, O puissant one, that foremost of men, viz., the son of Surya.
Listen now, O monarch, to those hymns as I recite them.
Truly, O Brahmana, it was death to us that we had at all come hither to tempt thee of rigid vows and ascetic wealth.
Thus addressed, Shalya, answering, So be it ascended the car, O Bharata.
If, therefore, thou desirest it, O Brahmana, let this fire born of thy wrath abide in the great ocean, consuming the waters thereof, for it hath been said that the worlds are made of water.
As long as I am alive, O thou of Kurus race, it behoveth thee not to feel any anxiety.
Even thus, O Partha, did Kausika give them the information.
One that hath his soul under control never, O Bharata, disregardeth anybody in the three worlds,--no, not even the commonest creature, far less those bulls among men, the sons of Pandu.
At present, therefore, O blessed one, thou hast no other protector save thy father.
Karna too, otherwise called Vaikartana, O Bharata, in that battle, resisted Bhimasena, and the Karushas, the Kaikayas, and the Srinjayas.
I ask thee, O king, are there any regions for myself to enjoy in heaven or in the firmament?
This, O child, is not the occupation of a Brahmana devoted to asceticism.
That vast force, as also thyself, O bull of Bharatas race, have fallen into great danger.
Joy in the happiness of others, grief at sight of other peoples misery, desire to alleviate distress, abstention from injury, sincerity, forgiveness, and truth,--these, O Bharata, prevail amongst the Kurus.
O, do in haste what thou desirest; and stop not to consider its propriety.
O beautiful lady, go withersoever thou wishest!
Further, O best of the Bharata race, it is impossible, to proceed beyond this.
Nor do we see the reason, O slayer of Madhu, in consequence of which, O foremost of men, thou acceptest not the worship offered by us from love and friendship.
Vaisampayana said, O king, they are as follows: Duryodhana, and Yuyutsu, and also Duhsasana; Duhsaha and Duhshala, and then Durmukha; And, O monarch, learn that king Yudhishthira was a portion of Dharma; that Bhimasena was of the deity of wind; that Arjuna was of Indra, the chief of the celestials; and that Nakula and Sahadeva, the handsomest beings among all creatures, and unrivalled for beauty on earth, were similarly portions of the twin Aswins.
O scion of the Ajamidha race, by performing thy ablutions here in this river, thou wilt be freed from all thy sins.
Then Trita, O king, that best of ascetics, from within that hole, began to utter wails of woe.
Srutakarman, then, O king, thus assailed by the foe, became filled with rage, and cut in twain the foe-resisting bow of Citrasena.
When I heard that Draupadi, her voice choked with tears and heart full of agony, in the season of impurity and with but one raiment on, had been dragged into court and though she had protectors, she had been treated as if she had none, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success.
Then, O ruler of the earth, accompanied by his brothers, the valiant prince proceeded by the shore of the sea towards the land where the Kalinga tribes dwell.
He that desireth his own good should never quarrel, O sire, with his relatives.
The words that were uttered by Bhishma, O Madhava, were beneficial and worthy of adoption.
Hearing these words of Vasudeva, Gandhari said, It is even so, O Keshava, as thou sayest!
Surely, O thou of well-rounded hips, O damsel of exquisite charms, beholding thy form of superhuman beauty, king Virata is sure to forsake me, and will turn to thee with his whole heart.
Tell me all about it, O Sanjaya!
O sinless one, O hero of celestial form, I am anxious to know who thou art that hast come hither.
Go, fight carefully and summoning all thy patience, O thou of Kurus race!
O child, it behoveth thee, O Abhimanyu, to grant the boon that thy sires, thy maternal uncles, and all these troops ask of thee.
Rahu swallowed the Sun most untimely, O monarch!
O Dhananjaya, he had heard before that his sire Jayadratha had been slain by thee, O sinless one.
By this act, O Yudhishthira, two objects will be accomplished; one is a requital of the services rendered by the Brahmana and the other is the acquisition of high religious merit.
O thou of great energy, thy flames, like the rays of the sun, extend themselves above, below, behind, and on each side.
And Duryodhana said, If this be Partha, O Radheya, then my purpose hath already been fulfilled, for then, O king, if traced out, the Pandavas shall have to wander for twelve years again.
Sometimes adopting the right mandala, sometimes the left mandala, and sometimes the motion called Gomutraka, the son of Pandu began to career, O king, stupefying his foe.
It is even so, O Hidimva, as thou sayest.
Indeed, even as the illustrious Agni when he blazes forth (at the end of the Yuga) for destroying the mobile and the immobile universe, even so looked, O king, the mighty car-warrior Partha.
Yudhishthira said, It is not strange that thou shouldst speak thus, O scion of Madhus race!
Therefore, O foremost of truthful men, asked by me, tell me truly (what that cause is).
Tomorrow, however, O lord of Earth, I will frustrate all his purposes.
O king, neither the sons of Pandu, nor the chaste Krishna, are in that city of Yadavas.
Acquiring the earth by means of the prowess of thy arms, make gifts, O best of the Bharatas, unto the Brahmanas and to the means of thy deceased ancestors as one should.
Listen now to me, O Madhava, about those that are yet alive!
I therefore, ask thee, O king, with what feelings thou wilt give me what I ask and upon which I have set my heart.
O Bharata, this act must be regarded as extremely cruel, deserving of universal execration, infamous, and sinful, and certainly leading to hell.
And the roll of thunder, O king, was heard frequently on all sides.
O prince, O thou of great splendour, accept us that accept thee.
Bhishma said, O foremost one of the Kurus, O lord of the earth, thou enquirest about the strength and weakness of the foe.
Then, O Bharata, in consequence of thy sinful policy, commenced a dreadful battle, making the hair stand on end, between ourselves and the Pandavas.
All of them then enquired after thy son, that ruler of men, saying, Is our king Duryodhana still alive, O Sanjaya?
When that foremost of the monarchs, greatly agitated, fell down on the Earth, loud wails were uttered, O best of the Bharatas, by the ladies (of the royal household).
What else, O Brahmana, shall I do for thee?
Do not, O thou of great wisdom, impute any fault to the Pandavas!
O descendant of Kuru, in these delightful and sacred and heaven-like halls of assembly a long time hath fleeted away in thy company without my seeing Vasudeva, Valadeva and other leaders of the Vrishni race.
Hearing what Srinjaya has to say, and what thou also, O thou of sweet smiles, may have to say, let that be settled this very day what should be done for thee.
I shall, O monarch, conquer the earth furnished with mountains and woods and forests.
It behoveth thee, O Lord, to grant a boon now to this first of Brahmanas.
What wilt thou, O king, afflicted as thou art with calamity, do?
Casting him off without delay, make peace with the Pandavas, O son!
O son of Pritha, afflicted as I am with all these hundred kinds of misery on account of Yudhishthira, why dost thou, O chastiser of foes, yet deem me happy?
A superior, O Bharata, by being addressed as thou, is killed though not deprived of life.
Having said these words unto me, O monarch, the king entered that lake.
None else, O bull among Brahmanas, save the divine Narayana, and the eternal Nara called also Jishnu, succeeded in passing beyond the point so guarded.
As she sat employed in her task, O bull among men, day was about to wane, but yet those jujubes showed no signs of having been softened.
Thou art as honest as the wise Vidura, or Bhishma, or ourselves, or Kripa, or Drona, O thou of great wisdom, dissension with ones own kin are forbidden, sinful and reprehensible!
of the earth, O Monarch, who will go to battle, the sons of Pandu have, by naming them, distributed them in their own respective shares.
Thou art not the foremost amongst us, O Prana.
Those foremost of Brahmanas, O tiger among men, in consequence of their eagerness for enjoying the merits of tirthas, took up their abodes on the bank of the river up to the site of Samantapanchaka.
That blazing Prosperity, O king, which we not many days ago saw with heavy hearts in Yudhishthira at Indraprastha, is today seen by us to be owned by thee, she having, O mighty-armed monarch, been snatched by thee from the royal Yudhishthira by force of intellect alone.
Thus, O Krishna, afflicted with numerous griefs, and in great distress, am I living, with Dhaumya at our head, but deprived of the company of the adorable Kunti!
Repair to thy own city, O protector of men.
O heroic scion of Kurus race, alms also are not now obtainable here as easily as before.
If thou art able to perform it, O Somaka, then I shall explain it to thee.
Thyself, O tiger among the Kurus, and the renowned Gandhari also, should not harbour malice towards the Pandavas.
Whom also, besides thee, O slayer of Madhu, and foremost of men, shall we consult in this difficult affair?
I am sure of always having whatever I desire, when, O tiger among men, I have thyself staying on my side.
Yudhishthira said, It is not my wish, O Krishna, that thou wilt go to the Kurus, for Suyodhana will never act according to thy words, even if thou advisest him well.
They are called Foam-drinkers because they live, O Matali, on nothing else save that foam.
After Bhishma is slain, O son of Radha, thou mayst then again engage in battle on Duryodhanas side, if thou hast no preference for any of the parties.-- Karna said, I will not do anything that is disagreeable to Dhritarashtras son, O Kesava.
O tiger among men, without doubt all the Pandavas and the other kings crowned with prosperity, come not to a sixteenth part of thee.
None, O Bharata, (in the Kaurava army), at that time, felt the loss of Drona, seeing the great bowman Karna clad in mail and stationed at the head of the array.
In the Vedas, in the Ramayana, and in the sacred Bharata, O chief of Bharata’s race, Hari is sung in the beginning, the middle, and at the end.
Thou, O Kesava, desirest to establish peace and brotherly feelings between the two parties.
And Divination said, I am Divination, O goddess, come near thee.
And wherefore, O child, do we over and over again scatter our speech to the winds?
Well-spoken speech is productive of many beneficial results; and ill-spoken speech, O king, is the cause of evils.
As regards myself, I desire, O Bharata, thy good as also theirs.
I think, O lord, that the time hath come when I also should enter the city with them, after taking the permission of Yudhishthira and Vasudeva!
Then, O monarch, at the command of the royal son of Bhangasura, Vahuka went to the stables and began to examine the horses.
With broken cars, O monarch, the fallen elephants, and steeds lying on the ground, and men laid low, the Earth, miry with gore and flesh, and covered with streams of blood, soon became impassable, Karna slaughtered the Pancalas while Dhananjaya slaughtered the Trigartas.
Marutta said, Thou, O Purandara, the Viswadevas, the Vasus and the Aswins ye all know, that in this world there is no escape from the consequences of playing false to a friend; it is a great sin like unto that of murdering a Brahman.
O son of Surya, let these hostilities end with me!
Although his power waned greatly, yet the foes could not slay the king, for his power, O Yudhishthira, was established in righteousness.
I shall voice it, O hero.
O fool, thou thinkest Janardana will not fight, since he hath been chosen by the Pandavas to act only as a charioteer, so thou art not alarmed.
18 Sanjaya said, After the slaughter of Shalya, O king, the followers of the Madra king, numbering seventeen hundred heroic car-warriors, proceeded for battle with great energy.
Then, O monarch, thou shalt inspire confidence in both the gods and men.
Filled with great grief thinking of his defeat, and beholding Bhishmas prowess, O king, he addressed that scion of Vrishnis race, saying, Behold, O Krishna, that mighty bowman Bhishma of terrible prowess.
It is for this, O god of gods, that we inform thee of our present troubles.
Let him be told besides,--O Monarch, this very body of mine is at thy disposal and all the wealth I have.
I must tell you, O Bharata, of another wonderful event that occurred alter the birth of Vrikodara (Bhima).
When I heard that Arjuna, by his celestial arrow preventing the downpour by Indra the king of the gods, had gratified Agni by making over to him the forest of Khandava, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success.
While he shot his arrows in that battle and despatched hostile warriors to Yamas abode, neither the Kauravas nor the Pandavas could notice any lapses in him, even as the Daityas, O king, could not notice any in Vasava, the wielder of the thunder, in days of yore, while the latter was employed in crushing their divisions.
With all thy family, thou art now, O fool, reduced to the position of her slave.
Vaisampayana said, O tiger among Kurus, I shall recite to thee that narration, excellent and extensive and unrivalled, in connection with the illustrious hero.
Vaishampayana said, Listen to that history, O ruler of men!
O most praiseworthy of men!
And Kesini gave that meat, O son of the Kuru race, unto Damayanti.
each of us, O king, having been desirous of vanquishing the other.
Formerly, when the hour of battle came, this very religion, O thou of mighty arms, was declared by me (to thee)!
Duryodhana is a big tree of evil passions; Karna is its trunk; Sakuni is its branches; Dussasana forms its abundant blossoms Sanjaya said, I did thee farewell, O divine ruler of men.
O foremost of regenerate persons, was theirs an eternal place in Heaven?
And, O thou oppressor of all foes, the illustrious and exalted Vasishtha by his ascetic power and spiritual insight immediately knew all.
Krishna, that son of the Yadu race, said--Fear not, O respected one.
What end, O regenerate one, has been attained by those men who have been slain, for the sake of their friend, in battle?
Surrounded by those Atirathas on every side, the Pancala hero, O king, careered in that battle, displaying his quickness in the use of weapons.
Thou, O Vasudeva, art acquainted with the views of Duryodhana, Karna, and Sakuni, the son of Suvala.
And, O lady, the forest-paths are hard to pass!
66 67 68 Sanjaya said, Hearing that Karna of mighty energy was still alive, Prithas son Yudhishthira of immeasurable energy, exceedingly angry with Phalguna and burning with the shafts of Karna, said these words unto Dhananjaya, O sire, thy army is fled and hath been beaten in a way that is scarcely honourable!
We are all dependent on thee, O king of kings.
(Therefore) O king, seek with thy brothers, for my speedy slaughter.
Beholding these fierce omens that made the hair stand on end, and hearing also of the fierce vow of the mighty Arjuna, all thy warriors, O bull of Bharatas race became exceedingly agitated.
The mothers replied, We shall protect them, O Skanda, as thou desirest.
But, O Madhava, Dhritarashtras affection for his son is great.
The Kuru king Duryodhana seated in the midst of the Kurus, in a gentle voice but with deception lurking behind his words, eyeing Karna, and addressing Kesava, then said, Why, O Janardana, dost thou not accept the diverse kinds of viands and drinks, robes and beds that have all been prepared and kept ready for thee?
Then all the troops, placed in their proper posts, were seen, O Bharata, to stand, clad in mail and resolved to make death their goal.
Had this blood from my nostrils fallen on the ground, then, without doubt, thou, O monarch, wouldst have been destroyed with thy kingdom.
If thou performest the sacrifice, O thou of the Dasarha race, I shall be cleansed from every sin.
Saudasa said, If it is proper (for me), O foremost of superior Brahmanas, to say what thou askest, I should then, O best of regenerate ones, tell thee that thou shouldst never come back to me.
Agreeably to his vow, O thou of Kurus race, the ever-victorious Bhishma was incessantly engaged in slaughtering the troops of the Parthas.
Elephants, O king, struck (with shafts), fled away on all sides.
O holy one, O lord of the past and the future, O lord of the world, O protector of the universe, let Sakra, afflicted with thy wrath, have thy grace.
Vasudeva said,--Thus instructed in the principles of high religion by the preceptor, the pupil, O son of Kunti, did everything accordingly, and then attained to Emancipation.
O puissant one, these preparations of thine are destructive of merit.
O giver of honours, it seems that Partha, who without ascertaining what is practicable and what is impracticable, made this vow in battle, was afflicted by destiny itself, his judgment having taken a misdirected course!
When morning came, O monarch, the king set out, with a large train of women and old men.
Yudhishthira enquired, Which, O snake, is the higher of the two, truth or alms-giving?
Supported by the Pandavas, O king, seek thou both religion and profit.
Know, O thou of Kurus race, that as long as those heroes live, the wielder of the thunder himself cannot deprive them of their ancestral share in the kingdom.
Like a painter producing a picture, it was thou, O king, who hadst caused me and Dhritarashtra to spring into life.
All the kings became incapable of even looking at Ashvatthama, O monarch, who then resembled the scorching Sun himself in the sky.
The young ones again said, We do not, O mother, say that thou art dispelling our fears with a false story.
Behold, O Madhava, those young ladies of beautiful bosoms and abdomen, well-born, possessed of modesty, having black eye-lashes and tresses of the same colour on their heads, endued with voice sweet and dear like that of swans, are falling down, deprived of their senses in great grief and uttering piteous cries like flights of cranes.
Behold, O hero, I am alive today, even I, who could know peace by losing sight of Nakula for the short space of time taken up by a wink of the eye.
With practice, however, O son of Kunti, and with the abandonment of desire, it can be controlled.
His celestial car decked with gold, given unto him by Agni, is impenetrable in every part, and his steeds also, O hero, are endued with the speed of the mind.
51 Dhritarashtra said, Exceedingly difficult of accomplishment was that feat, O Sanjaya, which was achieved by Bhima who caused the mighty-armed Karna himself to measure his length on the terrace of his car.
O lord of earth, I am also a wrestler.
Here, O Yudhishthira, is the sacred hermitage of that sage embellished with trees bearing blossoms and fruits at all seasons.
Prince Duryodhana said unto Dhritarashtra, Send, O father, by some clever contrivance, the Pandavas to the town of Varanavata.
And, O exalted one, Nakula goeth staining himself with Vaisampayana continued,--Hearing these words of Drona, Dhritarashtra said,--O Kshatta, the preceptor hath uttered what is true.
Vrihaspati said, Prosperity of a rival is always painful to ones feelings, and for this reason too, thou dost with try attendant gods persecute the Asuras with their with and kin, and kill the most prosperous among them; hence, O Lord of the gods, am I changed in appearance at the thought that my rival is prospering, therefore, O Indra, do thou, by all means, restrain Samvarta and king Marutta.
Listen to those words, O Janarddana, as I repeat them.
When Duryodhana, O princess, is for taking thee before the assembly, this weak-brained king will no longer be able to protect his prosperity.
O tell me, I am full of doubts respecting the mighty Bhima.
Beholding the troops of Dhritarashtras son flying away, the Sutas son, following them, O king, began to forcibly stop them.
39 Shalya said, Do not, O Sutas son, give away to any man a golden car with six bulls of elephantine proportions.
Gautama said, Through my love and affection for thee, and in consequence of thy dutiful services to me, a long time has elapsed without my knowing it, O foremost of Brahmanas.
O slayer of hostile heroes, constantly smiting (as thou dost) cars and steeds and men and elephants, we behold thee on thy car, O mighty-armed one, to resemble a second Sun.
O Bharata, at this place all creatures bear ill-will to, and the Rakshasas chastise, that man who committeth aggression, be it ever so little.
And cured of their fever (of anxiety), they said unto him, As persons drowning in the wide ocean safely reach the shore by means of a boat, so have we, by thy aid, O lord Govinda, escaped from this inextricable difficulty.
Sakuni continued,--Thou hast, O son of Kunti, lost much wealth, horses and elephants and thy brothers as well.
Pursuing him for a while, the son of Radha, O bull of Bharatas race, smilingly addressed Sahadeva and said these cruel words, Do not, O hero, fight in battle with those that are superior to thee.
40 Sanjaya said, Thus rebuked by Shalya of immeasurable energy, the son of Radha, feeling the propriety of his rebukers name in consequence of his wordy darts, and becoming filled with rage, answered him thus: 41 Sanjaya said, Hearing, O sire, these words of Radhas son who delighted in battle, Shalya once more addressed Karna, citing an example, I am born in the race of men who performed great sacrifices, who never retreated from battle, who were kings whose coronal locks underwent the sacred bath.
O bull among Munis, what can be the reason of this thy present joy?
decked with gold, cut off by Hridikas son with his shafts, dropped down from his body, O king, like a cluster of stars dropping down from the firmament.
Seeing then that army thus smitten by thy son, O king, the Panchalas headed by Bhimasena rushed at them.
I promise to win all that wealth of his, and thou, O Duryodhana, shalt then enjoy the same.
Indeed, O blessed one, it was equipt with many walls made of pure gold and decked with jewels and gems.
And the citizens by thousands, O king, on cars of diverse kinds, and many on foot, also came out, desirous of beholding Hrishikesa.
Mounted on their cars, drawn by excellent and well-decked horses, and with quivers on their backs, they surrounded that horse, O king, and endeavoured to capture it.
When the Kuru army was thus broken, the Kuru king, O monarch, viz., thy son, rushed against all his foes advancing against him.
Yudhishthira said, Break this array once, O foremost of warriors, and make a passage for us.
O daughter of Jahnu, tell me all.
Janamejaya said: Indeed, O holy one, how was it that the Andhakas along with Vrishnis, and those great car-warriors, the Bhojas, met with destruction in the very sight of Vasudeva?
And, O son of Indradyumna, we have come, desirous of seeing the sacrifice, and to meet king Janaka and speak to him.
Arjuna said, Urge the steeds, O Hrishikesa, to where Durmarshana stayeth.
Thus, O thou of great wisdom, the deities had taken birth as human beings, and after having accomplished their purposes have gone back to Heaven.
Without any trouble, however, O son of Radha, thou wilt behold Dhananjaya today.
Dhritarashtra said,--The names of rivers and mountains, O Sanjaya, as also of provinces, and all other things resting on the earth, and their dimensions, O thou that are acquainted with the measures of things of the earth in its entirety and the forests, O Sanjaya, recount to me in detail.
1 2 Vaishampayana said, Upon the fall of Karna, O monarch, the son of Gavalgana, with a cheerless heart, set out that night for Nagapura, on steeds that rivalled the wind in speed.
And, O king, that first of all warriors in the three worlds, the son of Indra, with a calm mind, and firmly adhering to his purpose, then devoted himself, without the loss of any time, to ascetic austerities.
More than all my sons, O Janardana, is the daughter of Drupada dear to me.
Beholding his wrath, Keshava, conversant with the workings of the (human) heart said, Why, O Partha, dost thou draw thy sword?
It is for him, O Brahmanas, that I have come to this dreary forest full of terrors and haunted by tigers and other beasts.
Having heard this delightful news about the discomfiture of our enemies, we have been exceedingly gratified, O Kauravya.
O lord, show thyself.
O Bharata, on the expiration of the thirteenth year, recollecting all their woes, they may shower death-dealing weapons, even like virulent poison, upon the Kauravas!
That monarch of the forest, O king, is known for this throughout the world!
O ruler of men!
It would have been better for thee if thou hadst never been born in the womb of Kunti, or having taken thy birth there, if thou hadst come out on the fifth month an abortion, than to have, O prince, thus come away from battle, O thou of wicked soul!
Both Vrikodara and myself, and the twins and this maiden also, all await, O monarch, thy commands.
And, O child, take to heart this command of an old man, this wholesome advice that I give, and which is even a nutritive regimen.
The lord of born beings, himself sprung first of all, created, for all embodied beings, bodies which were stainless, pure, and obedient to virtuous impulses, O wisest of the descendants of Kuru!
And, O protector of the earth, hundreds of thousands of creatures were born, and all were virtuous and began to multiply in virtue, all being free from sorrow and disease.
Yayati replied, Thou art sprung from my heart, O son, but thou givest me not thy youth.
And, O represser of foes, see this mountain having minerals, rivulets, and beautiful woods and beasts, and snakes of diverse shapes and a hundred heads and Kinnaras, Gandharvas and Apsaras.
Aiming then, O Bharata, five irresistible shafts, Karna, otherwise called Vaikartana or Vrisha, slew five Pancala warriors.
Through the power of the high-souled god who had granted that boon to Arundhati and through the energy of thyself, O amiable one, I shall duly grant thee another boon now, that the person who will reside in this tirtha for only one night and bathe here with soul fixed (on meditation), will, after casting off his body obtain many regions of blessedness that are difficult of acquisition (by other means)!
It was for your sake that she took birth, as the daughter of Drupada, among human beings, issuing not from any mother’s womb, O Yudhishthira, endued with agreeable perfume and capable of delighting the whole world.
It was duly sanctified, O chief of men, with many garlands of white flowers, with many well-filled water pots arranged on every side; with charcoal, soaked in ghee, of Tinduka wood, and mustard seeds, O thou of mighty arms; with shining weapons properly arrayed, and several fires on every side.
Thou art without any anxiety, O Bharata, and thou art cruel.
O Bharata, unto thy royal son and with Sikhandin also at their head, desired to rescue (Sweta).
And, O king, while he was living in the forest, he had neither slaves nor cars, neither brother nor friends with him.
And, O bull of the Bharata race, in the same way, other creatures also, even those born in the race of birds went in unto their wives during the season alone.
It behoveth thee not, O king, to grieve for what hath arisen from thy own fault.
O hero, full well do I know the reason why thou hadst entered my chamber and didst what thou regardest to be an act disagreeable to me.
Thereupon, Suvalas son, taking up mace, jumped down from his excellent car, and with that mace, O king, he felled Sahadevas driver from the latters car.
Do thou, O Brahmana, relate why the sons of Dasaratha--the brothers Rama and Lakshmana--went to the forest with famous princess of Mithila.
Then the mighty-armed and white-steeded Arjuna, O king, of sureness of aim and having Krishna for his charioteer, advanced on his car.
There, O Bharata, with elephants and steeds slain by Karna, the earth became impassable and miry with flesh and blood.
Vaisampayana said,--It is said, O Janamejaya, that the god Agni while residing in Mahishmati, earned the reputation of a lover.
Hearing these words, Bhima, O Bharata, smiled in derision and disregarding the Rakshasa, continued eating with averted face.
Therefore, tell me, O Sanjaya, everything that happened there,--everything that happened in the battle, born of the folly of my wicked son.
In that host of thine, as also in that of the Pandavas, there were hundreds and thousands of kings, O best of men.
Know, O thou of Kurus race, that those wicked sons of thine, headed by Duryodhana, abandoning both virtue and profit, disregarding morality, and deprived of their senses by avarice, are now acting most unrighteously towards, O bull of men, their foremost of kinsmen.
But an incorporeal voice, about this time, said unto the king and his wife with their ministers and priest, all with hearts paralysed by anxiety, those words,--This thy son, O king, that hath been born will become both fortunate and superior in strength.
And those bulls among the Bharatas, throwing upon me the burden of looking after all those that were to be fed by them, would, O thou of handsome face, pay their court to me.
It is evident, O king, that thou knowest that pleasure may be derived from the possession of various objects of enjoyment.
Such a foe, O king, thou hast, by thy words, placed in a position of ease and comfort!
O chief of Bharatas race!
O thou of mighty arms, bear that burthen to the best of thy power and might.
To thee, O purifier, nothing is unknown in the three worlds.
O perpetuator of Kurus race, O thou that art fully conversant with every duty, it behoveth thee to show mercy to this child, forgetting the Kuru prince (Duryodhana) and the wicked Jayadratha.
O Purandara, animals have not been ordained to be slaughtered in sacrifices.
How shall I, O Govinda, tamely bear it?
His bow cut off in that combat, and deprived also of his armour, that mighty car-warrior, then, O king, took up another bow capable of piercing every foe.
These men, sworn to conquer or die, are summoning me, O king, to great battle.
If, O father, I am really the daughter of a hired chanter of praises, of one that accepteth gifts, I must offer my adorations in the hope of obtaining her grace!
Thou, O lord of the gods, art the first-born, the ruler of the universe, and our refuge.
Those words, however, O Kesava, have flitted away from my memory.
Vaisampayana continued, Thus addressed, Utanka, O chief of Bharatas race, then left that spot.
Therefore, take me before the preceptor and carry me thither, O Uttara.
The Brahmana said, In this connection, O blessed lady, is cited the ancient story of what kind the institution is of the five sacrificing priests.
O thou of taper thighs, it hath also been heard by us that Madayanti, the wife of Saudasa, commanded by her husband to raise offspring went unto Rishi Vasishtha.
11 Dhritarashtra said, After having obtained the command of the army, and after he had been addressed by the king himself in those sweet and brotherly words, and after he had ordered the troops to be arrayed at the hour of sunrise, tell me, O Sanjaya, what did Vikartanas son Karna do?
But, O Krishna, in respect of that matter, thy words shall be my guide.
O, kill this wrath of thine that staineth thy ascetic energy.
54 Vaishampayana said, Having visited Kurukshetra and given away wealth there, he of the Satwata race then proceeded, O Janamejaya, to a large and exceedingly beautiful hermitage.
Questioned by me, O, explain it all!
Thus occurred that great carnage, making the hair stand on end, in consequence, O king, of thy evil policy!
Vaisampayana continued, King Dushmanta, hearing all this, said, Well-spoken, O princess, this that thou hast said!
Therefore, O king, I desire to be discontented.
The illustrious Vrihaspati then said to her, Very good, thou needst not, O goddess, fear, Nahusha of vicious soul.
Hearing those indistinct sounds of his, Dronas son said, O wretch of thy race, there is no region for those that slay their preceptors.
Take her therefore, to thyself, O Bharata, at my command.
I am thus known to Arjuna said, Sikhandin, O Krishna, will certainly be the cause of Bhishmas death, for Bhishma, as soon as he beholds the prince of the Panchalas, abstains from striking.
And one day, O grinder of foes, the Kuru and the Pandava princes, with Dronas leave, set out in their cars on a hunting excursion.
Shakra, coming down from heaven, asked him the reason, saying, Why O king, art thou employed (in this task) with such perseverance?
O descendant of the Bhrigu race, attend then to so much as relateth to the exalted race of Bhrigu, revered by Indra and all the gods, by the tribes of Rishis and Maruts (Winds).
Amongst them, however, Trita, by his acts and study (of the Vedas), O king, became the foremost, even like his sire Gautama.
Whether it be peace or war with the foe that thou wishest, any wish, O Krishna, that thon mayest entertain, will certainly be honoured by us.
Besides all this, O king, that I have said, listen now to something else that I say.
Tell me all, O Sanjaya!
Thick also, O king, was the dust raised by the running steeds, a dust that was carried from one place to another by the wind.
If this be the condition, O warder, that the door is open to those only that are old, then we have a right to enter.
O daughter of the snake chief, I do not grieve for my slain son.
Citrasena, the ruler of the sea-coast, with his son, O Bharata, hath been forcibly despatched by Samudrasena to Yamas abode.
And, O king, struck with that mace, Vegavat fell down on the ground, like a weather-beaten and faded lord of the forest of decayed roots!
And, O monarch, although herself deserving to be waited upon by others, the daughter of Yajnasena, O Janamejaya, passed her days in extreme misery, waiting upon Sudeshna.
O queen, my heart no longer turns as of old towards kingdom.
Vaisampayana continued, Hearing these pitiable words of the Kuru king, O monarch, the assembled denizens of Kurujangala all began to weep.
And, O scourge of thy enemies, there is not another person, save thee, that can slay Rama!
Swords with hilts of ivory, and standards, and darts, and steeds, and elephants, and cars of diverse kind, O king, and banners, and axles, and yokes, and wheels of many kinds, were cut off in various ways by Karna, observant of a warriors vow.
But, O king, I know the means by which Yudhishthira himself may be vanquished.
Arjuna said, What are indications, O Lord, of one who hath transcended these three qualities?
And, O wicked-minded one, thou also, being distressed on account of thy fallen soldiers, shalt be freed from thy sin, on beholding that mortal.
Sanjaya said, Hear, O king, of the splendid prowess in battle of youthful Abhimanyu while engaged in breaking the car-ranks (of the Kauravas), protected by the son of Bharadwaja himself.
Know, O Bharata, that betting is my bow, the dice are my arrows, the marks on them my bow-string, and the dice-board my car.
O, do as I bid thee.
For, O Krishna, the sons of Pandu also, who disregarding the claims of all Vaisampayana continued,--Hearing these words of Vasudeva, all the assembled monarchs began to reprove the ruler of Chedi.
This is my certain conviction, O king, that an intelligent Kshatriya must not do that which may bring disgrace upon him.
Here the creative and the dispensing deity, and Varuna also rose upwards, and here too they dwelt, O king!
While that success, O king, which is won by battle, is the worst.
Come there, O king, with thy mother and thy counsellors and officers.
That head thereupon fell down on the Earth like a piece of meat from the claws of a hawk, and then his trunk also fell down, O thou of great glory.
56 Vaishampayana said, At the outset, O Janamejaya a fierce wordy encounter took place between the two heroes.
From her are born four other kine, O Matali, supporting the four quarters and therefore, are they called the supporters of the quarters (Dikpali).
During that year, O king, was begotten upon her by the illustrious Dhritarashtra a son endued with great intelligence who was afterwards named Yuvutsu.
O Brahmana!
I will, therefore, O king, with great regularity, wait upon that best of Brahmanas according to thy instructions in that respect!
Send, O Bharata, unto Drupada without loss of time some messenger of agreeable speech, carrying with him a large treasure for the Pandavas.
Sanjaya said, Thus addressed by Vyasa, the heroic king Yudhishthira the just refrained, O bull of Bharatas race, from himself seeking to slay Sanjaya said, At this time Duryodhana, under the influence of wrath, approached Drona and addressing him said these words, for inspiring him with joy and provoking his anger.
follows: In order, O dear ones, dissensions may not take place between you and your cousins, we have settled that Khandavaprastha should be your abode.
It is thus, O Ashtaka, that the gross and visible body developeth from the subtile essence.
Thou shalt, O Madhava, next say unto the auspicious Krishna of great fame, that daughter-in-law of the high-souled Pandu, who is conversant with the details of every virtue, these words, O thou that art highly blessed, O thou of noble parentage, O thou that art endued with great fame, that becoming behaviour which thou always showest towards my sons is, indeed, worthy of thee.
O lord, having lived for one night in thy own mansion in happiness, thou mayst then follow the steed, O foremost of victorious warriors.
Deeply pierced, O monarch, by thy son armed with the bow, Bhima became exceedingly agitated like the ocean at the full or the new moon.
Take them all, O king!
Sanjaya said, During the progress, O monarch, of that battle, making the hair stand on end, and when all the combatants were filled with anxiety and greatly afflicted, the son of Radha.
Then, O sire, thousands of men, with eyes full of tears, fled away in all directions, having heard these lamentations of the king.
O best of Brahmanas, these ear-rings are capable of being taken away, when such opportunities present themselves, by deities and Rakshasas and Nagas, if worn by a heedless person.
Saudasa said, Say, O learned Brahmana, what is in thy mind.
That lofty and gorgeous standard made of gold, O king, thus cut off (by Uluka), fell down in front of Yuyutsus car.
There, in that tirtha situated on the bank of that river, all the gods with Vasava at their head, the Viswedevas, the Maruts, the Gandharvas, the Apsaras, the Island-born (Vyasa), Suka, Krishna the slayer of Madhu, the Yakshas, the Rakshasas, and the Pisachas, O king, and diverse others, numbering by thousands, all crowned with ascetic success, always reside.
O sinless one, it seemeth to me now that there only it is possible for us to meet.
benedictions of those illustrious members of the regenerate order, as a return for the homage the latter received,--that they, O Janardana, could sleep in the deep woods resounding with the shrill and dissonant cries of beasts of prey can hardly be believed, undeserving as they were of so much woe.
Hearing these words of Krishna, the ape-bannered Arjuna, smiling, replied unto Krishna who was never fatigued with exertion, saying, Shalya and Karna, united together, are not a match for myself alone, O Janardana!
O thou of unfading glory, do thou accomplish that which I shall now tell thee, O mighty-armed one.
If Dharma be not a myth, then, O Krishna, thou wilt surely achieve all that the invisible voice said.
Speak, O hero, for what hast thou any need?
I know Mahadeva truly, O bull of Bharatas race!
Speedily alighting then, O bull among men, from his car, Shakuni, that mighty car-warrior, quickly ascended the car of Uluka.
Thus dismissed, he repaired to his capital and the Pandavas too, O blessed lord, wandering from forest to forest passed their days merrily with Draupadi.
Therefore, O thou of the Kuru race, making thy heart what it ought to be, agreeably to the order to which thou belongest, and casting away this course of feebleness, summon thy energy and bear thy weight like one that beareth it manfully.
Without any reason, O king, thou hatest, from the moment of their birth, thy dear and gentle brothers,--the Pandavas--endued with every virtue.
Addressing the monarch, they said, We cannot, O king, speak of any transgression in the presence of Vidura!
Dhritarashtra said, If there is anything still left unsaid by thee, O Vidura, say it then, as I am ready to listen to thee.
Scorched with the powerful shafts of Bhimasena, every limb of mine is suffering from torturing pain I shall, however, for all that, fight to the best of my Dhritarashtra said, Tell me, O Sanjaya, what did my warriors do after the heroic ruler of the Sindhus had been slain, by Arjuna.
After some time, O king, it so happened that certain robbers lifted the cattle of a Brahmana, and while they were carrying away the booty, the Brahmana, deprived of his senses by anger, repaired to Khandavaprastha, and began to reprove the Pandavas in accents of woe.
This is the boon that we desire, know then, O chief of the gods!
But, O giver of proper respect, the curse that Urvasi hath denounced on thee will be to thy benefit, O child, and stand thee in good stead.
Resolved to return, O Bharata, he retraced his steps.
Vaisampayana said, O king, then those foremost of bowmen, of immeasurable prowess, holding bows stringed at full stretch and equipped with quivers and arrows and wearing finger-caps made of the guana-skin, and with their swords on, proceeded with Panchali towards the Gandhamadana, taking with them the best of Brahmanas.
I look back only on my previous guilt: I ask thee with anxious heart, O learned one, tell me what is exactly in Ajatasatrus mind, Vidura said, Even if unasked, one should speak truly, whether his words be good or bad, hateful or pleasing, unto him whose defeat one doth not wish.
Yudhishthira said,--Desirous of the imperial dignity but acting from selfish motives and relying upon courage alone, how, O Krishna, can I despatch ye (unto Jarasandha)?
Sanjaya said, Listen to me, O king, as I describe, O Bharata, that wonderful battle fought by thy son, that encounter between one and the many.
Thou hast won them, O chief of the Bharatas, and thine is a celestial and high goal.’ Vaishampayana continued: Then Dharma, and Shakra, and the Maruts, and the Ashvinis, and other deities, and the celestial Rishis, causing Yudhishthira to ascend on a car, proceeded to Heaven.
And, O Kauravya, like unto the lord of birds (Garuda), the ruler of Saubha rushed towards Dwaraka, bringing with him, O bull among men, his host equipped with all kinds of arms, skilled in all weapons, consisting of a dense display of cars and elephants and cavalry abounding in banners, and well-paid and well-fed foot-soldiers possessed of great strength and bearing every mark of heroism and furnished with wonderful chariots and bows.
Do not grieve, O bull of Bharatas race, for this is not new.
O mighty-armed hero, be inclined to make peace.
O giver of great wealth, all this betrays only deception, falsehood, and insincerity.
And she said, Childless, O great king, as I was, from fear of my co-wives, when Sikhandini, my daughter, was born, I represented unto you that it was a son!
The Supreme Lord of the universe said unto him, Performing a sacrifice, bathe with due rites, O chief of the celestials, in Aruna, that tirtha which saveth from the fear of sin!
Full of virtuous resolves, O large-eyed one, of face as handsome, as moon, the place where thou hadst resided, viz., the body of Kavya, hath also been my abode.
It was not for the sake of saving my life, it was not from fear, it was not from grief, O king, that I entered these waters!
And, O worst of kings, thou canst not now even look at the princess of Vidarbha.
O holy one, O thou of excellent vows, it behoves thee to answer these questions of mine, O learned Rishi, correctly, truly, and accurately.
The sons of Pandu, however, O king, are incapable of being exterminated by me.
How then, O monarch, dost thou make me a gift of the whole earth?
And, O king, whatever countries the celebrated and illustrious monarch conquered, the people everywhere, from Brahmanas to swains, were all more attached to him than to their own fathers and mothers.
O king, she, and her children, intoxicated with the wine they drank, became incapable.
Then, Trita, O monarch, duly gave unto them their shares with proper mantras.
It is for this, O king, that thou O slayer of foes, art called Shalya.
Thou, O sire, knowest the entire past and future of this universe.
And after some time had passed thus, those ascetics of rigid vows once more said unto her, What, O blessed lady, can ascetics with senses under control do?
Exerting themselves according to their might, and achieving the most difficult feats, thou shouldst not, O chief of the Kurus, find fault with thy troops.
Never before, O Bharata, has a battle been fought like that between Karna and Arjuna today.
And filled with great joy, O king, they worshipped those heroes.
Knowing this fact, he became the driver, O Bharata, of Partha like the Self-create becoming the driver of Rudra.
Thou comest from battle, O son of Kunti, for seeing the king.
Turn back, O Duryodhana!
After a long while, O best of men, Dhritarashtra, having repeatedly swooned, addressed Vidura, saying, Let all the ladies retire, as also Gandhari of great fame, and all these friends.
And the master also comforted Kunti, saying, Live, O daughter!
The nose said, These arrows will never cross through me, O Alarka.
O sire, I am of the same mind in this matter with the illustrious Bhishma.
Today, O son of Pandu, I shall extract the dart that lies sticking to thy heart!
Addressing her thus, O king, my mother, that highly-blessed lady, in seeming smiles, dismissed the princess of Kasi.
There is no happiness that is higher than Yoga.--Do thou know this, O Rama.
O Bharata, he indicateth that as the sand-grains are scattered by him with ease, so will he rain arrows with perfect ease on the foe (in time of battle).
And that mighty warrior, stretching Dhritarashtra said,--When that great bowman Sweta proceeded towards Salyas car, what did the Kauravas and the Pandavas do, O Sanjaya?
O thou of fair hips, I act virtuously, not from the desire of reaping the fruits of virtue, but of not transgressing the ordinances of the Veda, and beholding also the conduct of the good and wise!
Vasudeva said, Behold, O Dhananjaya, this Suyodhana who hath transgressed us!
O best of all the gods, prescribe the means of setting him free.
If I slay him, O Keshava, I will not be able to live in this world for even a moment.
I know, O king, that thou wouldst not desert me.
O righteous one, in what capacity wilt thou reside in the city of Virata?
The delicate princess (Draupadi) deserving of every comfort, O Purandara, should go with us.
But, O thou that resemblest a celestial, the office of equerry is not worthy of thee.
Live thou, O son, inclined to peace and eating fruits and roots of the forest.
Such a man rescues his ancestors to the eleventh degree, as also himself with his wives and sons, O chief of Bharata’s race.
After five and ten years had passed away, O monarch, king Dhritarashtra afflicted (constantly) by the wordy darts of Bhima, became penetrated with despair and grief.
For then, owing to thee, O thou of fair hips, I may go the way that is reserved for those that are blessed with children.
Indeed, O king, as a man excited with wrath crushes swarm of ants, even so, O Bharata did that son of Pandu begin to crush the Kaurava host.
O foremost of men, this sacrificial horse wanders at will.
Teeming with all kinds of gems, the Earth, with her forests and mountains, O monarch, once more cometh to thee that hast no foes alive!
Yudhishthira said, Here are met the Pandavas and the Srinjayas, and Krishna, and Yuyudhana and Virata, O son of the Suta Gavalgana, tell us all that Dhritarashtra hath directed thee to say.
Then that foremost one of Bhrigus race, accompanied by those ascetics, bidding me farewell, departed, O Bharata, for the mountains whence he had come.
Listen to it, O Dhananjaya!
If ever, O repressor of foes, I said this is to be,--that hath always been.
King Yudhishthira is always kind, O Bharata, to thy children.
Why, O son of Gavalgana, didst thou too forget this great object, possessed as thou art of great wisdom, or why didst not thou remind Karna of it?
I shall use my staying charms, O king, and the weapons of all the gods will avail them not.
And O foremost prince of Bharatas race, may that virtuous prince administer the entire kingdom of the earth in righteousness, and with the respect and approbation of numerous high-souled Siddhas, and having his praises always extolled by the court heralds.
In the midst of that concourse the mighty-armed and handsome elder brother of Keshava, O monarch, as he sat down, was worshipped by all around him.
When that darkness shrouded everything, O king, we beheld those brave combatants, steeds and men, move away from that spot.
Ahalya said, I am highly gratified with thee, O learned Brahmana, with thy unintermitting devotion, O sinless one.
Indra then made friends with Namuchi and entered into a covenant with him, saying, O foremost of Asuras, I shall not slay thee, O friend, with anything that is wet or with anything that is dry!
Do thou with fraternal feeling ask of me a boon, O Bharata.
O thou of mighty arms, I will vanquish the Kauravas in battle.
In thee, O chief of men, I have my refuge.
Thus, O timid one, was the existing usage established of old by Swetaketu, the son of Uddalaka, in defiance of antiquity.
Listen to me, O Janamejaya, as I describe them!
Having caused all thy troops and thy brothers to be slain, O Suyodhana, thou shouldst not, if thou art inspired with righteous motives, think now of saving thy life!
Therefore, for the destruction of Partha and for my good, it behoveth thee, O foremost of car-warriors, to accept, from love, the office of charioteer.
Those learned persons at last came, O king, to that tirtha where the Sarasvati ran a bloody current.
Thou art skilled in a narration, O Sanjaya!
--Having heard these commands of my brother, I shall not slay thee, O king.
Bound I have been with wealth by the Kauravas, O nephew, it is for this that I am speaking to thee like a eunuch,--I will accomplish the desire thou mayst cherish.
Therefore, with all thy advisers, make such arrangements in thy city as are proper, and pay homage, O monarch, as thou pleasest, to the gods.
Having slain Karna, O lord of the earth, I shall today come back from the dreadful battle to pay thee my respects by walking behind thee.
Though pierced thus from every side with numerous arrows by these illustrious warriors, Duryodhana still, O monarch, did not waver, in the presence of all the troops who stood there as spectators.
Then the mighty Bhimasena, O monarch, dragging away those huge elephants, made a way for the Pandavas to come out.
It was after a long time that Indra (gratified with such devotion) approached Pandu and, addressing him, said, I shall give thee, O king, a son who will be celebrated all over the three worlds and who will promote the welfare of Brahmanas, kine and all honest men.
Many, O Arjuna, are breathing their last meanwhile.
12 Sanjaya said, Seeing his driver fallen, Shalya, O king, quickly took up his mace made wholly of iron and stood immovable as a bull.
Listen, O unvanquished one, to the loud wails of those elderly ladies and those others of middle age at sight of this terrible carnage.
And there were brave Kshatriyas, who having injured one another, did not abandon their weapons or set up any wails, O sire, On the other hand, lying in those places where they lay, roared with joyful hearts, and biting from wrath with their teeth their own lips, looked at one another with faces rendered fierce in consequence of the contraction of their eyebrows.
Sanjaya said, While fighting in that battle, O bull of Bharatas race, neither the bow nor the car of Bhishma had suffered any injury.
O chief of the descendants of Bharata, then when the beast was carried away by Siva, the gods spake to him saying, Cast not a covetous glance at the property of others, disregarding all the righteous rules.
O bull of Bharatas race!
O Lord of the universe, I am being reduced both in splendour and strength.
Sanjaya continued.--Understanding, however, what he intended to say, Gautama (Kripa) replied to him, saying,--I am incapable of being slain, O king.
This is destiny, O tiger among men.
Like the great river Ganges agitated by a hostile wind, the Pandava host, O king, once more became exceedingly agitated.
And horsemen rushed against horsemen, car-warriors against car-warriors, O king, and against elephants also, in that dreadful conflict.
Thou hadst, however, O royal sage, destroyed thy acquisition by thy vanity alone, and thereby covered the hearts of all the denizens of heaven with darkness in consequence of which none of them could recognise thee.
Thou knowest everything, O Bharata.
Those huntsmen, O lord, used every day, to procure, with great regard, a basketful of meat for Bhimasena, O king!
If, O slayer of foes, the cause is known to thee, do thou then tell me.
Behold these celestial Rishis and Siddhas who have attained to the region of the gods.’ Gifted with great intelligence, Yudhishthira answered the chief of the deities once more, saying, ‘O conqueror of Daityas, I venture not to dwell anywhere separated from them.
Therefore, O son of Nahusha, accept her as thy wife.
Yudhishthira said--O Krishna, who is this Jarasandha?
And now, O chief of Bharatas race, it is long since that I saw the lord my sire.
What has been ordained for a person, O hero, must have to be endured by him.’ Beholding Nakula and the others fall down, Pandu’s son Arjuna of white steeds, that slayer of hostile heroes, fell down in great grief of heart.
And, O slender-waisted girl, answer me truly whose daughter thou art.
The foremost of women and devoted to my husbands, even I, O Krishna, was seized by hair, O slayer of Madhu, in the sight of the Pandavas, each of whom is like an Indra himself!
Although young in age, yet being installed duly by me, O monarch, the virtuous Vichitravirya looked up to me in everything.
After this, when the Nishada prince began once more to shoot with the help of his remaining fingers, he found, O king, that he had lost his former lightness of hand.
Without doubt, this knowledge that I have is the result of thy grace towards me, O thou of unfading glory, my heart is possessed of cheerful tranquillity in consequence of its being devoted to thee.
Let all the necessaries of the sacrifice, O foremost of men, be got ready.
Always smeared with white sandalpaste, Vala, having the plough for his weapon, beholding that foremost of rivers change her course, became, O king, filled with wonder.
I do not wish to say anything more unto thee, O foremost of Bharatas race.
There, O best of kings, the adorable Surya of great splendour, having performed a sacrifice, obtained the sovereignty of all luminous bodies (in the universe) and acquired also his great energy.
Thou art, O blessed one, known (for thy virtues) over the three worlds.
This very province also of mine hath equally been blessed by thee, O sinless Tarkshya.
O lord of earth, that blazing Prosperity which had before paid her court to the sons of Pandu, hath now been acquired by thee along with thy brothers!
(And addressing Dhritarashtra he said),--This Sanjaya, O king, will describe the battle to thee.
Mustering thy great prowess, O mighty-armed one, proceed against Vrishnis race, who is always gratified by the diadem-decked (Arjuna).
Cars, O monarch, looking like the changeful forms of vapour in the sky, deprived of riders and steeds, were seen in thousands.
And many, O king, looked beautiful in their wounds like blossoming Kinsukas.
Oh, listen to it duly, O thou that art skilled in all tasks!
But, thou, O Kunti, shall be able to bring my sons up as if they were thine.
Thou beholdest now, O son of Vichitravirya, the dreadful fruit of that rejection by thee (of the counsels of thy friends) though warned against it by many illustrious persons.
Vaishampayana continued, Thus addressed by the king, O Janamejaya, the Suta said unto him, The mighty car-warrior Vaikartana, O monarch, hath been slain with his sons and brothers, and other Suta warriors, all of whom were mighty bowmen ready to lay down their lives in battle!
Hearing these and many other words, O king, of Vrikodara, that were veritable darts, king Dhritarashtra gave way to cheerlessness and sorrow.
The Gandharva continued, Then, O bull in Bharatas race, Nandini, alarmed at the sight of Viswamitras troops and terrified by Viswamitra himself, approached the Rishi still closer, and said, O illustrious one, why art thou so indifferent to my poor self afflicted with the stripes of the cruel troops of Viswamitra and crying so piteously as if I were masterless?
Takest thou any pleasure, O child, in this slaughter of even all those innocent Rakshasas that know nothing of thy fathers death.
If, O grinder of foes, thou dost not act according to the words of thy friends, thou shalt have to repent upon beholding thy army afflicted with the arrows of Partha.
The motive is victory, O Yudhishthira.
I desire, O Grandsire, to know his origin and glory.
Do thou, therefore, tend her, O son of Bharata.
The blood, however, (that I am regarded to have quaffed) did not, O mother, pass down my lips and teeth.
All of us, therefore, O Bharata, shall install Karna, that foremost of men, endued besides with every accomplishment, in the command of the army!
Dhritarashtra said, O holy one, I did not like this business of gambling, but, O Muni, I think, I was made to consent to it drawn by fate!
Listen, O Karna, to this simile of a crow that I am about to narrate.
And Sahadeva also, O monarch, said these words of grave import, O Suyodhana, it will all be as thou wishest!
That snake, O king, forcibly tore it away from Parthas head, quickly reducing into fragments that well-made ornament set over with many a gem and blazing with beauty, like the thunderbolt riving a mountain summit decked with lofty and beautiful trees graced with flowers.
He, O king, had a hundred sons endowed with pre-eminent piety.
O son of Pritha, let that happiness last longer through thy stay here, for a few moments more.
I am pleased with thy behaviour!--Bowing unto him, I then speedily came back, and mounting on my car, I once more blew my conch decked with gold, And then, O Bharata, the combat commenced between him and me.
And, O best of men, I too with innumerable monkeys set out towards the south in quest of Sita, O mighty-armed one.
Therefore, with your assistance, I shall now perform the sacrifice, O the best of regenerate beings.
The princess Krishna too, O Yudhishthira, could not be deserving of that place of sinners.
The driver said, The sons of Draupadi, O king, have been slain, with all the children of Drupada himself, while they were heedless and trustfully asleep in their own camp!
The goddess said,--Within a short time thou shalt conquer thy foes, O Pandava.
What is the name of this kind of flight, O crow, that thou hast now adopted?
Beholding Bhima, that delighter in battle, advancing quickly, the puissant king of the Madras addressed the Sutas son in the following words: Shalya said, Behold, O Karna, the mighty-armed son of Pandu, who is filled with rage.
One day, O Brahmana, Ruru entered an extensive forest.
O thou of eyes like lotus petals, I am restored to my senses through the auspicious touch of thy hand.
Then, O blessed lady, I was brought under the control of thy son by the deity of love who pervadeth the nature of every being, and I then (mentally) chose that mighty son of thine as my husband.
Having learnt all this, O hero, I have freed thee from the curse of the Vasus even in this way.
Then, O mighty-armed king, Sikhandins mother represented unto her lord the truth about her daughter, Sikhandin.
Unto him Arjuna replied, Through thy grace, O Madhava, this vow that even the gods could with difficulty accomplish, hath been accomplished by me.
O bull of the Bharata race, he said all this unto my father.
I will now enumerate the chiefs by their names, listen to me, O Matali.
I do not, O Krishna, see the man, observant of Kshatriya virtues, who can, O slayer of foes, venture to conquer us in battle.
Addressed, O king, by her lord in private, Kunti replied, Having given her the formula of invocation only once, she hath, O king, managed to obtain two sons.
It resembled the repeated combats, O lord, between embodied creatures and their senses.
It is, therefore, O Bhimasena, that we have been overwhelmed with this calamity.
It was thus that those tigers among men, the sons of Pandu, ever taking delight in battle, stood having disposed their troops in counter-array against the army of thy son, and sucking as it were, the marrow, O bull of Bharatas race, of our warriors, and casting their eyes on Bhimasena stationed at their head, mace in hand.
So here is thy son Virochana, O Prahlada, restored by me to thee.
Some, having slaked their thirst or groomed their animals, and some, wearing (fresh) armour, O chief of the Bharatas, and some, having comforted their brothers and sons and sires, and placed them in camp, once more came to battle.
O monarch, the Cedis and the Matsyas, rushing against Karna alone, poured upon him showers of shafts.
O king, the Dhartarashtras constitute a forest of which the Pandavas are, I think, tigers.
Trembling from agitation he addressed the afflicted maiden sunk in woe, saying, Do not go back to thy fathers abode, O blessed lady!
Listen, O king, as I tell thee the utmost limit of my power in battle, or of the energy of my weapons, or of the might of my arms, O thou of mighty arms!
I also am alone capable of slaying them, O best of men.
And Brahma, O king, said unto her, Slay these creatures of mine!
Without slaying all the Pancalas, I will not, O lord, put off my armour!
Arise, O Bharata, and fight, observing the duties of a Kshatriya!
And, O Yudhishthira, so also one that is skilled in weapons approacheth one that is not so skilled; the strong approacheth the weak.
O Keshava of the Vrishni clan, thou knowest my vow that whoever among men would tell me, Partha, give thy Gandiva to some one braver than you, I shall at once put an end to his life.
The heroic ruler of the Madras, struggling carefully in that battle, thus afflicted by those mighty car-warriors, drew a formidable bow capable of bearing a great strain and of imparting great force to the shafts sped from it, and pierced Satyaki, O sire, with five and twenty shafts and Bhima with three and seventy and Nakula with seven.
This is known to me, O thou of excellent vows!
Sanjaya said,--Deserving as thou art, this question is, indeed, worthy of thee, O great king.
And, O Brahmana, as the day was fading, she, the excellent sister of Vasuki, became thoughtful, fearing the loss of her husbands virtue.
Knowing all this, O auspicious lady, do not set thy heart on sorrow.
O thou best of the Bharatas, I have told thee all about the curse of king Kalmashapada by Saktri, the illustrious son of Vasishtha.
I should always say what is for thy good, O Kaurava.
All these, superior to thee as regards the four cardinal virtues and as regards also a hundred other merits, all these foremost of men, have died, O Srinjaya, and they that are like them will also die.
Although these are known to thee, O Brahmana, I will yet speak of them, so please of all things promiscuously.
O Karna, act in such a way that Jayadratha may not be slain by Arjuna!
Yudhishthira said, My salutations to thee, O grandsire.
These and many other large rivers, O king, such as Sadonirmaya and Krishna, and Mandaga, and Mandavahini; and Mahagouri, and Durga, O Bharata; and Chitropala.
And those Brahmanas who were all Brahmacharis beholding the Pandavas, O king, asked them, Where are ye going to?
How great is his power, O Vrihaspati!
Vaisampayana said, They then all saw king Dhritarashtra, O Janamejaya, and having seen him, enquired after his welfare, and were, in return, asked about their welfare.
Vaisampayana continued, Then, O Lord of earth, those warriors, the Trigartas, accompanied by their infantry of terrible prowess, marched towards the south-eastern direction, intending to wage hostilities with Virata from the desire of seizing his kine.
O monarch, dwelling in heaven, king Yayati, resembling a great Rishi, became an object of much regard, and enjoyed the highest fruits of those regions.
The two sons also of Karna, O monarch, those two brothers of prowess incapable of being baffled, filled with rage, slaughtered the Pandava army in several parts of the field.
In the welkin a voice was heard, saying, Excellent, O Kesava, Excellent!
All the creatures also, O monarch, having repaired to Prabhasa, returned with Soma amongst them to the place where Daksha was.
O Yudhishthira, O child, thou knowest the subtle path of morality.
Then Dharmas son, O Bharata, said these words unto that chastiser of foes, the son of Rohini, Behold, O Rama, this formidable encounter between the two brothers!
And, O Anu, thy progeny also as soon as they attain to youth, shall die.
The Brahmana said, In this connection is cited the old narrative, O lady, of the discourse between a Brahmana and (king) Janaka.
They, O thou of great soul, shall enjoy the blessings of heaven, O monarch!
The lord Sthanu, O monarch, gave unto Skanda a companion possessed of great impetuosity, capable of producing a hundred illusions, and endued with might and energy that he could enhance at will.
Reflect thus, O son, and thou wilt find that this thy army is for thy own death.
Filled with anxiety all of them became hopeless of life!’ 26 The holy one said, ‘Arise, arise, O Gandhari, do not set thy heart on grief!
Why wouldst thou abandoning from foolishness the high prosperity that I won for thee, cast off thy life today, O king, yielding to silliness?
In consequence of the diverse things both myself and Partha had to do, O Bharata, an encounter, O king, could not hitherto take place between myself and Arjuna!
Sanjaya continued, After Vrikodara had said these words, Vasudeva, filled with joy, applauded him highly and said unto him, Relying on thee, O thou of mighty arms, king Yudhishthira the just will, without doubt, get back his own blazing prosperity after the slaughter of all his foes!
tiger among men endued with great prowess was slain, Bhishma, the son of Santanu, performed, O king, all his obsequies.
Relent, therefore, O hero, it behoveth thee not to send me away.
O slayer of Madhu, tell me what has removed thy gravity today.
And there came also, O king, Duryodhana and the Kurus accompanied by Kama.
The driver of the Bhimas car having fallen into a swoon, the steeds, O king, began to fly away with great speed, in the very sight of all the bowmen.
Duryodhana and other heroes, attired in robes dyed in yellow, formerly used, O king, to wait reverentially, with joined hands, on those old counsellors.
O bull of the Bharata race, how much more, therefore, should they be protected that are endued with every virtue and are humbly expectant of thy favours?
Even if they be more than men, O Krishna, I shall yet slay all those warriors today, however, furious in battle, if only they do not fly away from the field!
Put on armour, O hero, and bind thy locks!
The welkin then, thus covered with that dense shower of arrows decked with gold, looked beautiful, O chief of the Bharatas, as if a canopy embroidered with gold had been spread there.
War not, O Bharata, with the sons of Pandu!
Hence on serious occasions like this, I need not say anything more, O uncle, going thither today I shall gratify, with words mixed with blessings, the monarch Janamejaya installed at the sacrifice, so that, O excellent one, the sacrifice may stop.
For their sake, that foremost of streams came there, having made many abodes for herself in that spot, through kindness for those Rishis of sacred penances, O Janamejaya!
And, O great king, after the dismissal of Skanda, prodigies of various kinds occurred to disturb the equanimity of the gods.
And thy wife, O wretch, shall bring forth a son uniting herself with that Rishi Vasishtha whose children have been devoured by thee.
Inflicting terrible injuries upon the Kaurava warriors, Satyaki, who is dear to thee as life, cometh towards thee, O Kiritin!
Then, O monarch hearing these words of Sahadeva, Nakula the handsomest of men spake these words,--I shall certainly send unto the abode of Yama all those wicked sons of Dhritarashtra, who desirous of death and impelled by Fate, and moved also by the wish of doing what is agreeable to Duryodhana, have used harsh and insulting speeches towards this daughter o Yajnasena at the gambling match.
The river Sarasvati beheld, O monarch, that large body of Rishis penetrated with despair and plunged into anxiety for want of a broad tirtha wherein to perform their rites.
Thus addressed by him, Drona said smilingly, I am old, O mighty-armed one!
As men, while swimming in sport on the water, sometimes dive and sometimes emerge, O king, even so creatures sink and emerge in life’s stream.
Indra turning to Agni said, Do thou, O Jataveda, following my direction, go to king Marutta to present Vrihaspati to him, and say unto him that this Vrihaspati will officiate at his sacrifice and make him immortal.
Then, O Bharata, like masses of clouds scattered by the tempest the Bharata host, thus mangled and burnt in that battle by the high-souled Bhima, broke and fled in fear in all directions.
O son, I always think of the good I should do to this Brahmana, like what they do that live happily in others abodes!
Vaisampayana said, Then that bull of Bharatas race went to the sacred waters on the banks of the southern ocean, all adorned with the ascetics Vaisampayana said, Varga continued, We were then, O foremost one of Bharatas race, deeply distressed at this curse.
And the earth, welkin, heaven, and the waters, when agitated by a tempest, roar aloud, O Bharata, even such was the roar that arose in all the worlds at that time.
I do not speak an untruth when I say that thou, O Gangas son, art an enemy of the whole universe, and especially of all the Kurus!
Where is that fanning yak-tail also, O king?
Those heroes were then worshipped by others and they blazed forth in beauty, O king.
Yudhishthira said, When Duryodhana desired to tread along the wrong path, what did the aged Kuru grandsire say, O Hrishikesa, unto that vindictive prince?
And, O monarch, the encounter between Charudeshna and Vivindhya was as fierce as that in days of yore between Vritra and Vasava!
The Holy One said, Without doubt, O thou of mighty arms the mind is difficult of subjugation and is restless.
But, O father, being luckless I have got only two sons!
Therefore, O auspicious lady, I wish to sleep, for I have not the power to stand.
A loud noise was heard, O bull of Bharatas race, in the welkin, made by the Yakshas, and the Rakshasas and the Pisachas.
And displaying his extreme lightness of hands, and dancing (as it were) along the track of his car, he seemed, O king, to be present everywhere like a circle of fire.
Whilst they were being thus exterminated, many Kaurava leaders of great might, O Bharata, approached Bhima and began to fight with him.
Beholding her fallen down, Bhimasena of great strength addressed king Yudhishthira the just, saying, ‘O scorcher of foes, this princess never did any sinful act.
The Kauravas and all the kings of the Earth, also know, O Madhava, that I have made every endeavour to bring about peace.
Then, O king, that vanquisher of foes, the commander of the Pandava army, the prince of the Panchalas, beheld the cars of the father and the son (thus) surrounded (by the foe).
Thou rememberest, O Ajamida, everything, but still I will call thy attention to this.
All the others, O bull of Bharata’s race, have perished.’ Having said these words unto the king, Sharadvata’s son Kripa, addressing the grief-afflicted Gandhari, said these words unto her, ‘Thy sons have fallen while engaged in achieving feats worthy of heroes, while fearlessly fighting in battle and striking down large numbers of foes.
O bull of Bharatas race, thou seeketh, O sire, by unrighteous means this extensive empire, flourishing with prosperity and well-known to all the monarchs of the earth.
O, let not the tigers be driven from that forest!
Then Satyaki pierced him in return with many keen arrows, and struck his driver, O monarch, with three arrows.
After much suffering they at last reached, O king, a dense forest.
Therefore, O lord of kings!
But receive from me, O blessed one, the boon that thou desirest.
The like of what thy warriors then did unto Partha had never before, O king, been either seen or heard.
Vinatas son Garuda, O Bharata, beholding even a large concourse of birds, asketh not the aid of many followers (to vanquish them).
With his brothers, O king of kings, that hero of true prowess hath come out of this dreadful battle, so destructive of heroes, with life!
Indeed, the combatants, desirous of victory and filled with joy, speedily blew thousands of trumpets, O Bharata, of diverse kinds.
Without doubt, O Karna, the diadem-decked son of Pandu must have made this vow about the slaughter of Jayadratha for his own destruction!
Beholding Karna defeated by Bhimasena, five of thy sons, those uterine brothers that were great bowmen, could not, O sire, brook it.
Kunti said, According to thy promise, I will, O king, with concentrated mind, serve that Brahmana.
Even as an embankment is useless after the waters (of the field) have flowed away, even so, O king, are these lamentations of thine useless!
We saw crowds of cars, O king, deprived of riders, but unto which were yoked fleet steeds, dragged on all sides with the speed of the wind.
Janamejaya of the hilly country, endued with great prowess and accomplished in encounters with the mace, hath, O king, been slain by thy son Durmukha.
O beautiful damsel, I swear by my own self that if I find any evil to have befallen my father and mother, I will not live.
Thou hast, however, O grinder of foes, granted to four of thy brothers the pledge of safety.
With countless shafts shot from his own bow-siring, the son of Pandu, O king, cut off those clouds of arrows; upon which they fell down.
Approaching the king, Gandhari, O bull of Bharatas race, and the other ladies of the household, all fell down on the earth, deprived of their senses.
Therefore, O child, thou shouldst not consign thy heart to sorrow.
Accept their words, O king, O thou possessed of great wisdom, act according to what both Krishna and Bhishma have said.
The combatants, O king, encountering one another, careered in battle, filled with wrath and taking one anothers life.
Well-trained car-warriors, O Bharata, with their shafts, despatched large bodies of cavalry and the footmen that urged and protected the elephants, to the other world.
Beholding me, they all urged their steeds to greater speed and coming up to me, said, By good luck, O Sanjaya, thou livest yet!
Thou thinkest, O thou of little understanding, that thou hast committed no offence against the Pandavas?
What thou, however, O Krishna, wishest to do for thy friends is scarcely strange, although it seems inexplicable how the object In view is capable of being effected by either mildness or its reverse.
O most righteous of the protectors of men, O (prince) of a powerful arm!
And this wealth, O Damayanti, is thine as much as mine.
With a gratified heart, Gautama then said unto the regenerate Utanka,--Why, O son, is thy mind so afflicted with grief today?
But the mighty bowman, Prishatas son, invincible in battle, though very much pierced with the arrows of the enemy, instantly began, O Bharata, to afflict the hostile ranks with greater vigour.
O son of Kunti, that thou will obtain all thy wishes.
O blessed goddess!
He, therefore, desired to jump upwards, O monarch, for beguiling Vrikodara.
O mighty Garuda who movest in the skies, we seek thy protection.
It is cruel of thee, O great king, that seeing me in this plight and so lamenting, thou dost not, O king, approach and comfort me.
With these mighty arrows shot by thee, those creatures which have taken shelter in me are being killed, O tiger among kings.
Duryodhana said, You will have, O Yudhishthira, to encounter me one at a time!
O chastiser of foes, under any circumstances, war is never applauded.
The Saindhavas then, O king, shot hundreds and thousands of straight arrows at the wielder of Gandiva.
If, O king, thou thinkest of choosing others, point them out and I shall yoke them for thee.
Yudhishthira said, Thou hast heard, O child, in detail, what Drona hath resolved to accomplish.
They were royal sages, O regenerate one, that were sinless and truth-speaking.
Beholding that lightness of hand (in Satyaki), Drona, O king, smiling the while, suddenly pierced that bull among the Sinis with thirty arrows.
If, O hero, thou purposest to treat the evil-minded Duryodhana in any other way, that purpose of thine will be carried out exactly as thou wishest.
A son will be born of thee, who, though of the priestly caste, will be of a character fit for the military order; while a mighty son will Rama said, The blame is mine, O father, that like a stag in the wood, thou hast been shot dead with arrows, by those mean and stupid wretches--the sons of Kartavirya.
Sanjaya continued, Thus permitted by Drona, the son, O king, then made him the commander of his forces according to the rites prescribed in the ordinance.
Know, O monarch, that both are dependent on each other like the ocean and the clouds, the ocean causing the clouds and the clouds filling the ocean.
Drona said, The foe, O sire, I see not who may slay me while standing in battle I am engaged in fight, with wrath excited, and scattering (my) arrowy showers continually.
Let all the kings of Earth be to-day freed from danger!-- Karna said I know this, O thou of mighty arms!
O, this fair hand-maid of thine seemeth to me to be possessed of the beauty of a goddess.
These, O bull of Bharatas race, encountered each other for battle.
And when she failed to dissuade the dispeller of darkness, at last from fear of a curse, she reflected, O king, for a long time!--How may my innocent father, and that Brahmana also, escape the angry Suryas curse for my sake?
Similarly, O mighty king, and lord of the earth, abstention from doing injury to any creature is seen to be important than good speech and vice-versa.
Then, O Lord, by that power of thine make the Rishis curse come true.
As this, O king, Damayanti bowing down to her mothers sister with a glad heart, spake unto her these words, Unrecognised, I have still lived happily with thee, every want of mine satisfied and myself cared for by thee.
O thou endued with valour!
And, O Yajnaseni, thou art now a slave.
My going thither, O Yudhishthira said, Do, O Krishna, as it pleaseth thee.
O sire, do not quarrel, give them half the kingdom.
A servant, O king, followed the party at leisure, with the usual implements and a dog.
Observant of rigid vows, the great Dalvya Vaka, O monarch, poured Dhritarashtras kingdom as a libation on the fire, with the aid of those pieces of meat.
Be pacified, O lord of gods!
When I heard that Arjuna, after having pierced the mark in the arena had won Draupadi, and that the brave Panchalas had joined the Pandavas, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success.
Sanjaya said, Listen, O king, with undivided attention, to me as I recite what thy sons did after Devavrata had been killed in battle.
Arise, therefore, O Bharata!
Vyasa said, Myself, O son of Kunti, and Paila and Yajnavalkya, shall without doubt, achieve every rite at the proper time.
O son of Pritha, thy brothers, O king, were not such as to deserve Hell.
Chekitana and the (five) sons of Draupadi, O sire, having slain a large number of thy troops, blew their conchs.
O Muni, no Rakshasa was capable of devouring Saktri; he himself provided for his own death.
And then, O king, on the eighth day following of the dark fortnight, the Kauravas also accompanied by all their troops, began to seize the kine by thousands.
When they came, king Dhritarashtra addressing Yudhishthira, said, Listen, O son of Kunti, with thy brothers, to what I say.
Sanjaya continued, Embracing thy son then, Shalya the ruler of the Madras, joyfully answered that slayer of foes, viz., Duryodhana, saying, If this is what is thou thinkest, O royal son of Gandhari, O thou of handsome features, I shall, for that, accomplish everything that may be agreeable to thee.
Conversant with the ways of morality, why dost thou, O king, witness this act with indifference?
Beholding all those assembled citizens and inhabitants of the provinces, and his well-wishers also thus gathered together, and the large number of Brahmanas arrived from diverge realms, king Dhritarashtra of great intelligence, O monarch, said these words,--Ye all and the Kurus have lived together for many long years, well-wishers of each other, and each employed in doing good to the other.
O monarch, by rejecting advisers that are faithful and accepting those that deserve no confidence, this extensive and prosperous empire, O son of Kuru, thou art unable to retain owing to thy weakness.
O mighty-armed one, do thou now enjoy, O king, the rewards of all thy deeds of righteousness of those regions which thou hast acquired thyself by thy penances and of all thy gifts.
If the Earth herself cleaves in twain, or mountain crests split, I can re-unite them, O king, by my incantations before the eyes of all.
O king, be thou, O giver of honours, righteous in thy conduct towards the sons of Pandu.
Unyoking the steeds to their case, pluck off their arrows, O Madhava!
O thou of lotus-eyes, thou knowest, O timid girl, how we ourselves, for the perpetuation of the Kuru race, were begotten by Krishna-Dwaipayana.
Therefore, O son, if thou likest, it is good for us to go there.
Dost thou not behold, O Brahmana, that vegetable juice floweth from the wound in my hand?
O thou that are like unto an immortal, ask thou a fresh boon!
I will, O Duryodhana, gladden thee today with thy friends, by slaying in battle that hero, viz., Arjuna, that foremost of conquerors.
O son, they are again protected by many foremost of men endued with great activity, and of famous achievements, resembling the very Regents of the world and renowned over the whole earth.
I shall today reach the end of that woe, O son of Prishata.
In the game at dice, O slayer of Madhu, that was joyfully accepted by them, the Pandavas were vanquished and their kingdom was won by Sakuni.
For a moment, therefore, O sire, he seemed to yield to the crow.
Grieved at the prosperity of the high-souled Pandavas, thou conspirest, O Bharata, with Suvalas son about the gambling match.
Behold, O Bharata, those scimitars, decked with gold, and having ivory handles, and those displaced shields embossed with gold.
If I do not deserve to be abandoned by you two in battle, then, Dhritarashtra said, After that dreadful vow had been made in battle by Bhishma enraged by the words of my son, what, O Sanjaya, did Bhishma do unto the sons of Pandu or what did the Panchalas do unto the grandsire?
And, O illustrious ascetic and foremost of Brahmanas, how did those twelve years (of exile) of those warriors who were slayers of foes, pass away in the forest?
Kuru thereupon replied, saying, O thou of a hundred sacrifices, they that will die upon this plain shall proceed to regions of blessedness after being cleansed of their sins!
Let alone the Pandavas, O slayer of Madhu, the very gods are not competent to vanquish Bhishma, Kripa, Drona and Karna, in battle.
Hear, O monarch, why that disunion occurred between the Kurus and the Pandavas, and why also that exile into the woods immediately proceeding from the game at dice prompted by the desire (of the Kurus) for rule.
King Dhritarashtra, in great sorrow, said these words with reference to it: Dhritarashtra said, Beholding Rama approach that spot when the mace-fight was about to happen, how, O Sanjaya, did my son fight Bhima?
O king, it is the certain duty of those that reside in the kings realm to do what is agreeable to the king.
O thou of the priestly class!
Under these circumstances, O king, battle excepted, what dost thou desire?
Sanjaya continued, In this strain, O king, those heroes, the Pandavas, flushed with victory, repeatedly spoke there (rebuking and mocking Duryodhana).
Dhritarashtra said, Do thou again touch me, O son of Pandu, with thy hand, and do thou embrace me.
After Shalya had been invested with the command, loud leonine roars arose among thy troops and diverse musical instruments also, O Bharata, were beat and blown.
O child, Sanjaya is one of our trustiest friends.
He that is delicate and youthful in years, he that is brave and handsome in person,--that son of Pandu who is dear unto his brothers as also unto all, and who, indeed, is their very life though walking with a separate body,--he that is conversant with various modes of warfare,--he that is endued with great strength and is a mighty bowman,--tell me, O Krishna, whether that dear child of mine, Nakula, who was brought up in luxury, is now well in body and mind?
But before he could come down from his car, O Bharata, Drona with his shafts cut off that mace into fragments.
O Kaurava, O king, all these that are headed (even) by Karna, wait not on the field.
Having been insulted thus, O hero, what use have I with life.
Then Vrihaspati said to the queen of Indra who was beside herself through fear, What thou hast been told by me will come to be true, be sure, O goddess.
46 Vaishampayana said, Listen now to the large bands of the mothers, those slayers of foes, O hero, that became the companions of Kumara, as I mention their names.
From that day, O Bharata, the Rakshasas (of the region) were seen by the inhabitants of that town to be very peaceful towards mankind.
That tiger among men very cheerfully said unto me these words--Wait for me, O charioteer, restraining the steeds for a short space of time, that is, till I slay those that are bent upon my destruction.--Beholding then the mighty Bhima rushing mace in hand, all our troops (that supported him) became filled with delight.
O best of Sauti said, Then the snake-dame Jaratkaru, calling her own son, told him the following words according to the directions of Vasuki, the king of the snakes.
As a person, O king, who has to travel a long way is sometimes obliged to halt when fatigued with toil, even so, O Bharata, they that are of little intelligence, travelling along the extended way of life, have to make frequent halts in the shape of repeated births in the womb.
O Partha, on these slopes of the Gandhamadana, yon beautiful blossoming trees, being embraced by creepers with blossoms at their tops, look lovely.
A jackal is living in thy house, O king, in the form of Duryodhana.
Is thy mind, O king, pleased with thy residence in the woods?
On the other hand, if thou, O jackal, permittest it, I will even slay the mouse and feast on him.
Having brought it, I shall go hence, O lord, with thy permission.
Beholding that foremost of ascetics, Vasishtha, of the austerest penances, she worshipped him, O Bharata according to the rites observed by ascetics.
All thy warriors fled, O monarch, except king Duryodhana.
The ministers said, Hear, O monarch of him who told us before of the meeting between that foremost Brahmana and that prince of snakes in the woods.
The holy one said, It shall be, O thou of mighty arms, what thou, O Pandavas, sayest, I will strive to bring about that which would be beneficial to both the Pandavas and the Kurus.
long also, O chastiser of foes, wilt thou stay here?
36 Duryodhana said, This one, O Karna, will act as thy driver, this ruler of the Madras, who is superior to Krishna, like Matali the driver of the chief of the celestials.
Rise then, even now, O Suyodhana, and give us battle!
Therefore, O thou of Purus race, cherish thy high-souled son born of Sakuntala--And because this child is to be cherished by thee even at our word, therefore shall this thy son be known by the name of Bharata (the cherished).
Then, O bull of Bharatas race, Samyamanis son, standing on that car whose steeds were slain, looked at the son of the renowned king of the Panchalas.
Awake, O king, and understand the eternal virtues (of the order).
O, do not cut down that forest with its tigers!
This is true, O king.
Nakula, and Sahadeva, and Vrikodara the son of Pandu, and Satyaki, O king, that foremost of car-warriors among the Vrishnis, and Dhrishtadyumna, and Shikhandi, and others among the Pandus, the Pancalas, and the Srinjayas, worshipped the son of Kunti at the slaughter of the Sutas son.
The road, O king, along which the party proceeded, looked resplendent, O hero, and was highly comfortable for all, and resembled heaven itself.
While the scion of Sini, O sire, was thus being pacified by Sahadeva, the son of the Panchala king, smiling, said these words, Release Sinis grandson, O Bhima who is so proud of his prowess in battle.
I desire, O monarch, all this to be done by thee, O scorcher of foes.
Thou mayest now, O Suyodhana, be willing to make a gift of the earth to me.
With this wealth, O king, I will play with thee.
O son of Pritha, without yielding to scruples of any kind, to what he, O chief of Bharatas race, said, in answer to our enquiries, agreeably to heavenly forms.
O lord of men, assign me unto (the princess) Uttara.
Marutta said, Verily this rain-cloud floating in the air indicates that Indra must be near at present, therefore, O prince of Brahmanas, I seek shelter from thee.
Know this, O Vrikodara.
The thought consumeth, O Kesava, that being dragged into the presence of all the Kurus in their assembly by Dhritarashtras sons, insults worse than death were heaped on Krishna, O chastiser of foes, the banishment of my sons from their capital and their wanderings in the wilderness,--these and various other griefs, O Janardana, have been mine.
O foremost of warriors, pierce this division, and keep these to thy right.
Let this, however, O hero, be my understanding with Vikartanas son that I will in his presence utter whatever speeches I desire.
And when an army is routed, even brave leaders, O king, at the head of large divisions consisting of the four kinds of forces, are incapable of rallying them.
And having beheld him shining with his brightness, just as the fire shineth with its flames, they, O king!
Possessed of great valour, king Yudhishthira the just, O monarch, arrived at the lake known by the name of Dvaipayana within which Duryodhana then was.
Yet thou hast killed me, O king, for which I will curse thee certainly.
Sanjaya said, Unto the ruler of the Madras who was speaking in that strain, that chastiser of foes, viz., thy mighty-armed son of cheerful soul replied, saying, Do not, O mighty-armed one, think disparagingly of Karna, otherwise called Vaikartana, in battle,--that warrior who is the foremost of all wielders of arms and who is acquainted with the meaning of the whole body of our scriptures.
Beholding the prowess of Karna, O king, I thought that a single Pancala even would not, in that battle, escape from the son of Adhiratha.
Where is that manliness of thine, O sire, and where, O Suyodhana, is that pride cherished by thee!
Knowing this, O thou of mighty arms, form thou the array that thou wishest!
Thus have I, O Bharata, narrated unto thee all about the birth of Duhsala.
Indeed, all the Nagas placing the old and the young ones before them, bowed unto him with their heads and joining their hands addressed him, saying, Be gratified with us, O holy one!
Thereupon what happened to Rudra, learn from me, O Yudhishthira!
Elephant-warrior rushing against elephant-warrior and car-warrior against car-warrior in that battle slew each other with darts and lances and cloth-yard shafts, O Bharata.
These arrows, however, O monarch, caused thy sire little pain, for the son of Ganga received them laughingly.
And, O best of male beings, assuming also the form of half-man and half-lion, thou hadst slain in days of yore that ancient Daitya of mighty prowess known by the name of Hiranyakasipu.
For, O thou of beautiful face, thou art certainly equal in my estimation unto the wife of a superior.
And, O king, the younger brother of Vrishaparvan who was known by the name of Ajaka became noted on earth as king Salwa.
While those, O bull of the Bharata race, that having won enormous riches nevertheless, behave like Dhritarashtra said, Consider, O Duryodhana, O dear son, what I tell thee.
Listen, O king, to what Duryodhana said when overtaken by calamity.
Large numbers of Kshatriyas, inspired with desire of victory, were struck down with arrows, O king, and fell prostrate on the Earth.
Indeed, O chief of the Bharatas, thy soldiers fled on all sides.
Dhritarashtra said, What, indeed, O Sanjaya, did Duryodhana say when he saw that Karna turning away from the field upon whom my sons had reposed all their hopes of victory?
Thou, O Bharata, art loved and regarded by every body.
Indeed, what thou considerest to be beneficial for the Kurus was pointed out to me, O Muni, by Vidura and Bhishma and Drona.
O Kesava, I have no sinful feelings towards the Pandavas.
Vaisampayana said, Thus exhorted by that high-souled sage, the son of Pandu, O king, with his mind free from anxiety, continued to live in the forest of Kamyaka.
Tell me, O Sanjaya, what Rohinis son, well-skilled in encounters with the mace and well acquainted with all its rules, did on that occasion!
Rushangu, O Bharata, was an old Brahmana, who was always devoted to ascetic penances.
Then Shalya, O monarch, desirous of slaying him, pierced king Yudhishthira the just, that mighty car-warrior with many sharp arrows.
Then Suryavarman, displaying his great lightness of hand, pierced Dhananjaya with hundreds of straight arrows, O monarch.
Utanka said, Let it be so, O king.
Laughing at the Rishi who was stupefied by passion, the god said, I do not, O Brahmana, at all wonder at this!
Cease now, O Bhima!
I am, O monarch, well-pleased with thee and my resentment against thee hath been destroyed.
Let, therefore, the dice be cast and the rules of play be fixed, O Yudhishthira.
The throats of some were blue, and the ears of some were long, O Bharata.
Then the (other) sons of Pandu, surrounding Yudhishthira, all proceeded to the encounter, upon which, O king, a fierce battle was fought.
Through my affection for thee, O Dhananjaya, I have related this mystery to thee.
Thou shouldst not, O king, think highly of sacrifice.
Ashtavakra said, O king, O leader of fierce legions, in this assembly of monarchs of unrivalled power who have met together, I am unable to find out Vandin, chief of the controversialists.
Bhishma said, After he had quartered there, on third day, O king, Jamadagnis son of high vows, sent a message to me, saying, I have come here, do what is agreeable to me.
O puissant one, like Matali himself, I am fit to act as the driver of even Indra in watchfulness, in managing the steeds, in knowledge of coming danger and of the means of avoiding it, and in competence to avoid it in practice.
O thou of beautiful thighs and fair complexion, accept me as thy lord!
Then, O monarch, the son of Drona covered the Pandava troops, O sire, with thick showers of arrows, O bull of Bharatas race.
He pierced Yudhishthira, O bull of Bharatas race, with a hundred arrows, and Bhimasena with seventy, and Sahadeva with seven.
The valiant son of Subala, filled with rage, O king, in that encounter, pierced Satyakis armour and then cut off his golden standard.
I do not cherish the least fear, O Yudhishthira, of even Shakra himself!
The Rakshasa became stronger by break of day, therefore, hasten, O Bhima!
O my daughter of a lovely brow, the wrong pot of rice thou tookest as food.
O father, whatever boon thou wilt confer on me I shall surely accept gladly!
Then Duryodhana, O monarch, said these proud words unto Yudhishthira in the midst of his brothers and of the high-souled Krishna and Rama of immeasurable energy, Protected by the Kaikeyas and the Srinjayas and the high-souled Pancalas, behold ye with all those foremost of kings, seated together, this battle that is about to take place between me and Bhima!
Fearlessly that invincible warrior, filled with rage, assailed with keen arrows all the Pandus, and Dhrishtadyumna the son of Prishta, and Shikhandi, and the sons of Draupadi, and the large bands of the Pancalas, and the Kaikeyas, O sire, and the Somakas!
The son of Kunti, without being cheerful, said these words unto Kesava, The arrival of Satyaki, O mighty-armed one, is scarcely agreeable to me.
Arjuna, in particular, thinking all the while, O king, Ekalavya, saw Drona in private and relying upon his preceptors affection for him, said, Thou hadst lovingly told me, clasping me, to thy bosom, that no pupil of thine should be equal to me.
O thou of the fairest complexion, as regards a woman, she hath her father for her protector or her husband.
Then, O king, the combat with trees between that human being and the Rakshasa, became so terrible that the region around soon became destitute of trees.
Mahadeva replied, Cook these jujubes, O thou of excellent vows!
How then, O sinless one, could Bhima notice any lapses in thee!
Since thou didst not forcibly compel them to forbear, therefore, O slayer of Madhu, I shall, filled with wrath, denounce a curse on thee.
Penetrate the Bharata army, O hero, for I shall slay the wicked-souled Duryodhana and his army today with my keen shafts!
If thou beest, O king, propitiously disposed to me, then ask her to grant my desire.
Come, come, quickly, O crow, for I am waiting for thee.
And saluting Kripa and walking round him, O king, Yudhishthira, accomplished in speech, said these words unto that warrior of great valour.
Yonder, O Brahmana, the Somakas and the Panchalas, possessed of great fame, are careering amid my troops like a forest-conflagration.
The Gandharva continued, Thus addressed by Vasishtha, Viswamitra, O Partha, then forcibly seized Nandini, that cow (white) like the swan or the moon, and attempted to take her away, afflicting her with stripes and persecuting her otherwise.
Hereafter at the command of Yudhishthira, O monarch, Arjuna, did not move from the city of Senavindu but sent his troops only and brought under his sway those five countries and peoples.
Vaisampayana said,--Possessing a knowledge of the past, the present and the future, and seeing all things as if present before his eyes, the learned son of Gavalgana, O Bharata, coming quickly from the field of battle, and rushing with grief (into the court) represented unto Dhritarashtra who was plunged in thought that Bhishma the grandsire of the Bharatas had been slain.
And there, O king, the illustrious Deity cut off the heads of Madhu and Kaitabha with his keenedged discus!
And broken lances, O king, and the head of elephant drivers, and beautiful housings of elephants, and chords resplendent with gold, and collars, and darts and mallets and quivers, diverse kinds of machines, and beautiful bows, short arrows with polished heads, with hooks and iron crows for guiding elephants, bells of diverse shape, and hilts decked with gold, were seen by us falling down or (already) fallen along with riders of steeds.
Here, in this quarter, at a place called Usiravija, by the side of the golden lake, king Marutta performed, O foremost of Brahmanas, a sacrifice.
Hearing him, Bhima said, Look on this encounter, O brother, like a stranger.
And, O most praiseworthy of the descendants of Bharata!
This thy race, O king, owing to its learning and behaviour, and owing also to its being adorned with every accomplishment, is most distinguished among all royal dynasties.
On hearing of them, O Bharata, the kings of other lands came to his capital.
O lord of men, this is the holy spring that belongeth to Indra.
Bhurishrava too, O son of Rohini, and the valiant chief of the Madras have fallen!
O great river!
My wish also is precisely such, but, O holy one, I have no power (to carry them out)!
That dart, O king, pierced the heart of Satyasena in that battle and reduced it into a hundred fragments.
Neither the loss of my husband, O Madhava, nor loss of wealth, nor our hostility with the Kurus ever Vaisampayana continued, Thus addressed by her, Sauri the friend of Partha, then comforted his paternal aunt, Pritha, afflicted with grief on account of her sons.
They, however, O king, that were heroes, casting off all fear which is so difficult of being cast off, and observing the vow of warriors, fearlessly did their duty.
Indeed, O Dhritarashtra, thou so fond of thy son, art very much to be blamed for this, for knowing well his sinfulness, thou followest yet his counsel.
And, O thou of excellent vows, as long as Panchali will hold this vessel, without partaking of its contents fruits and roots and meat and vegetables cooked in thy kitchen, these four kinds of food shall from this day be inexhaustible.
Set him at liberty, O chief of the Kurus.
O monarch, I see not any other means by which we may accomplish our end.
And from that time, O king, Garuda hath ever lived in friendship with that snake.
Suyodhana will never make peace by giving up the kingdom, without, O Partha, undergoing at our hands a wholesale destruction with his kinsmen.
Therefore, do without delay what thou, O thou of Vrishni race, thinkest to be proper and beneficial for the Pandavas, or what, indeed, should next be done.
Shalya also, excited with rage, O king, slaughtered many Somakas and Pandavas, and once more afflicted Yudhishthira with many keen shafts.
Thy sons then, O monarch, proceeded towards the car of Karna.
Those high-souled warriors, surrounding that great bowman, the ruler of the Madras, stood, O king, desirous of battling on every side.
O, tell me truly all about this.
Then Shakuni, the son of the Gandhara king, possessed of eloquence, O monarch, said unto Duryodhana these words, How is this that we are standing here, while the Madraka host is being slaughtered before our eyes?
Still Karna will not be able to slay thee, O Dhananjaya!
Vyasa said, I give thee permission, O king.
And drinking it, O king, regain thou thy sobriety.
Blessed be thou, I shall now go and accomplish what is so conducive, O handsome one, to my benefit!
Thou, O Karna, challengest Dhananjaya, the son of Pritha, even like a hare challenging a mighty elephant with tusks large as plough-shafts, and with the juice issuing out of its mouth and rent cheeks.
I will sincerely endeavour, O Vidura, to bring about peace between the Kurus and the Srinjayas who are about to be slaughtered in battle.
I depend entirely upon thee, O king of kings.
O Bharata, O Ajamida, let not the prosperity of the foe be acceptable to thee.
That slayer of hostile heroes, O king, shrouding all the quarters with showers of arrows, slew Sushenas driver, and piercing Sushena himself again with three shafts, and then with three other broad-headed arrows, cut off his bow of great strength into three fragments.
The king Jarasandha, on whose behalf propitiatory ceremonies aged, O tiger among men, came out and gathered there to behold the fight.
Vaisampayana continued, Thus addressed by her, O Bharata, the Brahmana embraced her, and they both began to weep in silence, afflicted with grief.
23 Sanjaya said, While Sahadeva, filled with rage, was thus blasting thy host, Duhshasana, O great king, proceeded against him, the brother against the brother.
Here, O king, are seen holy sages and gods, together with virtuous and highsouled Brahmanas.
He then became celebrated, O Dhananjaya, as a speaker of truth.
There, behold, O son of Kunti, the Panchajanya of Krishna, exceedingly beautiful and of the hue of the moon, as also the blazing Kaustubha on his breast and his triumphal garland.
He that is desirous of snatching the blazing prosperity of his foe, should, O bull of the Bharata race, bring every direction under his subjection like the charioteer taming the steeds with his whip.
Shalya, the king of the Madras, hath been slain, and Jayadratha also, O Krishna, hath been slain!
O blessed one, go at thy ease.
Tell me also, O Suta, what Duryodhana did after that.
Having said these words unto the queenly Ulupi, the daughter of the snake chief, the illustrious Chitrangada proceeded to where her husband lay on the Earth and addressing him, said, Rise, O dear lord, thou occupiest the foremost place in the affections of the Kuru king (Yudhishthira).
O hero, slay our foes in battle like Indra slaying the Danavas.
O Janardana, he will truly give us beneficial counsel; and O Krishna, I will do in battle what he will say.
And, O king, that son of Diti, who was known as Hiranyakasipu, was known in this world among men as the powerful Sisupala.
All those, O lord, were slain by the Pandus and the Srinjayas!
And many, fallen on the field of battle, cried aloud, saying--O father, O brother, O friend, O kinsman, O companion, O maternal uncle, do not abandon me.
O king, with all my desires gratified, I lived happily in thy abode, in fact more happily there than in my own house.
If, O slayer of foes, thou hast both the Kurus and the Pandavas at thy back, the sovereignty of the whole world and invincibility before all foes will be thine.
Then Saradwats son, O king, repeatedly feeling great anguish, told Dronas son how his sire had been slain.
That foremost Utanka said,--Since, though able, O Krishna, thou didst not rescue those foremost ones of Kurus race, who were thy relatives and, therefore, dear to thee, I shall, without doubt, curse thee.
If thou, O king of kings, goest to the woods leaving me, I shall the, follow thee.
Then Bhima addressed her, saying,--When, O Kunti, sovereignty has been won, and when the time has come for thee to enjoy that sovereignty thus acquired by thy children, when the duties of royalty await discharge by thee, whence has this desire got hold of thy mind?
Tell me also, O Sanjaya, how did the battle take place there where Drona afflicted the Pandavas on the field.
Vaisampayana continued, Having said these words unto that prince, the adorable Hara of three eyes, the destroyer of all sins, the consort of Uma, and lord of wild beasts, the destroyer of (Dakshas) sacrifice, the slayer of Tripura and He that had plucked out the eyes of Bhaga, surrounded by his dwarfish and hunch-backed and terrible followers having frightful eyes and ears and uplifted arms, vanished, O tiger among kings, from that place with his consort Uma!
And then, O Bharata, the wise king, considering himself old in years took counsel with his virtuous ministers and spiritual adviser for installing Rama as regent of the kingdom.
Shortly after, O Partha, the monarch, possessed by the Rakshasa and terribly afflicted by him, lost all his senses.
O thou of mighty arms, I shall, with my mace, vanquish thee today with all thy younger brothers, as also all the Pancalas and the Srinjayas and all the other troops thou still hast!
O Bharata, look at me, who am thy father unto you and am old and blind, and still alive.
Yudhishthira said, Therefore, O Sire, I ask thee, I bow to thee, O grandsire, how shall we, in battle, vanquish thee that art invincible?
The king of the Madras, O monarch, endued with the prowess of a lion or an elephant, will career fearlessly in battle like the Destroyer himself in wrath amongst creatures at the time of the universal destruction.
Doth not the evil-minded Duryodhana with his sons and kinsmen deserve destruction when, unable to bear the sight of Yudhishthiras prosperity and finding no other faultless expedient, that wretch, O slayer of Madhu, deprived us of our kingdom by the sinful expedient of deceitful dice?
Learning all this, he that adhereth to Truth, O king, succeedeth in passing over all paths.’ 5 Dhritarashtra said, ‘Tell me in detail everything about the ways of that intelligence by which this wilderness of duties may be safely covered.’ 6 Dhritarashtra said, ‘Alas, great was the distress of that person and very painful his mode of life!
Solicited by me, O fool, thou didst not, from avarice, give the Pandavas their paternal share, acting according to the counsels of Shakuni!
O best of Brahmanas, for thee I reserved her.
O thou of faultless limbs, O thou that art endued with large eyes casting quick glances, he upon whom thou wilt look with desire is sure to be stricken.
Tell me, O highly blessed lady, how may I act towards him so that all may yet turn up well!
That tirtha came to be known in the three worlds after the name of Indra, O giver of honours!
The Pancalas, O king, inspired with the desire of victory, all rushed with speed against Karna like birds towards a tree.
Of both good and bad there is abundance, O chief of men.
There, the Sun is hanging low in the welkin, O lord!
And he added, It is not wonderful, O mighty-armed one, in thee, O son of Devaki, that Partha, having obtained thee for his charioteer, should achieve feats that are even super-human.
Or, if, O monarch, coming hither, they prove docile and obedient to us, we would then seek to repress them according to the dictates of political science (as explained by Kanika).
Therefore, O heroic son of Kunti, let not thy meeting with me be fruitless.
Having said this, O Bharata, that conqueror of hostile chiefs, Duryodhana, asked Sanjaya again, anxious to known more about the doings of the Pandavas.
Sport thou with him as thou likest during the day, O thou that art endued with the speed of the mind!
Karna said, O Duryodhana, all of us seek to accomplish thy will and, O king, I see that unanimity at present prevaileth among us!
We were also wronged by thee, O king, by the deprivation of our kingdom, by the cruel words spoken by thee, and by thy maltreatment of Draupadi!
It is parental affection, O thou of righteous soul, that caused me to fall away from righteousness.
If, O sinless one, thou art sincere in thy vow, then wilt thou, cutting off (from thy person) this coat of mail born with thy body, and these ear-rings also, bestow them on me!
O foremost of all persons, observant of duty, listen to everything I now say, so that, with an understanding adapted to my teaching, thou mayst succeed in attaining to the highest end.
O thou that art endued with effulgence equal unto that of Sakra himself, I know it, O Kaurava, for it is manifest, that that man upon whom thou mayest cast thy eyes in anger is sure to be annihilated!
By speaking repeatedly, O son, my mind becomes weakened.
47 Janamejaya said, This history, O regenerate one, that I have heard from thee is exceedingly wonderful, this narration, in detail, of the installation, according to due rites, of Skanda.
Thou knowest, O Krishna, even thing about the means by which it may be accomplished.
O holy one, if worn by any one, he would be freed from hunger and thirst and fear of every kind.
We shall today, O king, live upon water alone.
The prowess, Sanjaya said, And Dronas son, and Bhurisravas, and Chitrasena, O sire, and the son of Samyamani also, all fought with Subhadras son.
Wherefore then, O Bharata, acquainted with every morality and versed in all the Agamas, art thou overwhelmed (with grief) as if from ignorance?
The Earth, O monarch, became strewn with the bodies of men and steeds, and covered with streams of blood that inspired the timid with terror.
Listen, O Krishna, to what I for one think.
I desire to see, O Narada, Virata and Drupada and the other great Kshatriyas headed by Dhrishtaketu, as also Shikhandi, the Pancala prince, the sons of Draupadi, and Abhimanyu, irresistible in battle.’ 2 Yudhishthira said, ‘Ye deities, I do not see here Radha’s son of immeasurable prowess, as also my high-souled brothers, and Yudhamanyu and Uttamaujas, those great car-warriors that poured their bodies (as libations) on the fire of battle, those kings and princes that met with death for my sake in battle.
Listen again, O Brahmana, to some other auspicious duty that should be discharged if virtue is to be earned!
Avoid anger, O king, that which is given away, that which is done, the austerities that are practised, the libations that are poured on fire, nor one of these is ever destroyed or suffereth any diminution.
Slaughtered in battle by those high-souled warriors, the Pandava army began to reel in diverse ways, O king, like a boat on the waters tossed by the wind.
And, O king, the younger brother of Aswa who was known as Aswapati, a son of Diti, became on earth the mighty monarch Hardikya.
From compassion, O best of kings, thou hast acted with great rashness!
Sanjaya continued, Thus addressed by that ornament of battle, viz., Karna, thy son, worshipping the son of Radha, answered him, with a glad heart, saying, Accomplish that, O Karna, which thou thinkest.
Have then my permission, O Karna!
And, O Bharata, at length at a beautiful place called Pramanakoti on the banks of the Ganga, he built a palace decorated with hangings of broad-cloth and other rich stuffs.
And dropping the newborn infant on the banks of the river, O Brahmana, Menaka, the Apsara, being destitute of pity and shame, went away.
Thy subjects, O king, are well-assured that, like characters on stone, light in the sun, and billows in the ocean, virtue resideth in thee permanently.
There is no fear of snakes in that place, O thou of Kurus race!
Therefore, O deer, why dost thou reprove me?
Some combatant, O king, struck with his feet some foe that was dead, and some, O king, struck off with his sword, the head of a falling foe, and some thrust his weapon into the body of a living foe.
Then mighty Satanika, excited with rage, O Bharata, slew the four steeds of Chitrasena and then his driver.
Then Shakra, the lord of the deities, endued with blazing prosperity, addressed Yudhishthira and comforting him, said, ‘O Yudhishthira of mighty arms, come, come, O chief of men.
It is by disposition alone that one becomes respectable, O Krishna, endued with great intelligence and profound wisdom, the character of the illustrious Vidura, like unto an ornament (that he wears) adorns the whole world.
Those mighty car-warriors, the sons of Pandu, will, indeed, avenge their wrongs by destroying the whole race of king Dhritarashtra with all his counsellors.--(It was thus that I addressed them, and) seeing me afflicted by great anxiety and my senses tortured, Drona and Bhishma and Kripa and Dronas son then addressed me, saying, Fear not, O represser of foes, for if the foe wage hostilities with us, they will not be able to vanquish us when we take the field.
O best of regenerate ones, I shall, therefore, put an end to my life this very day.’ Having said these words unto his high-souled sire, that foremost of all persons conversant with Brahman, Dhritarashtra, overwhelmed with grief, became stupefied.
Janamejaya said,--O regenerate one, why was it that the god Agni become hostile in battle unto Sahadeva, who was fighting simply for the accomplishment of a sacrifice (and therefore, for the gratification of Agni himself)?
My life-breaths depend on thee, O delighter of the Kurus.
Before half the night was over, the son of Drona, O monarch, despatched the large host of the Pandavas unto Yamas abode.
Hearing this, Nala replied, Thou hast not, O monarch, done me ever so little an injury.
When the Harivansa Parva is being recited, Brahmanas should be fed with frumenty at each successive Parana, O king.
Then a very old mouse, named Kilika, said these just words, O king, in the presence of all his kinsfolk, Our uncle is not really desirous of earning virtue.
And Ruru replied, O messenger of heaven!
O Yudhishthira, Madhava is the progenitor as also the destroyer of all created beings of the four species, (oviparous, etc.,) existing in the three worlds.
Thou knowest, O thou of mighty arms, what the cherished intentions of Duryodhana are, and thou knowest also that I seek the welfare of king Yudhishthira the just.
O Creator of the worlds, thou hast appointed me their Protector, O Lord of the universe, let not the mobile and the immobile universe to be destroyed.
Vaisampayana continued, Then, O Bharata, Duryodhana assisted by Kama and Kripa, and the high-souled Bhishma pacified Drona.
Flight from battle, O king, is not the practice of those that are honourable, nor does it lead to heaven!
Or, O exalted one, grant permission for myself being installed at the sacrifice along with these my younger brothers, for permitted by thee, O Krishna.
Therefore, O son of Pandu exert thy might.
Expecting diverse good things and benefits from thee, O Arjuna, we have always uttered blessings on thee.
It has been said, O king, that ones guest should take that which one takes oneself.
At the ninth Parana, he acquires, O Bharata, the fruits of that foremost of sacrifices, viz., the Horse-sacrifice.
And, Bharadwaja, O Bharatas son, had an only son, named Yavakri.
Vaisampayana continued,--King Yudhisthira the just, hearing these words of Dhananjaya, replied unto him in a grave and collected tone, saying,--O bull of the Bharata race, set thou out, having made holy Brahmanas utter benedictions on thee, to plunge thy enemies in sorrow and to fill thy friend with joy.
Then Bhimasena, O king, and Dhrishtadyumna the son of Prishata resisted them with four kinds of forces.
Though struck with keen arrows and though they looked like porcupines in consequence of those arrows sticking to their limbs, still thy troops, O bull of Bharatas race, fled not from Partha in that battle.
In course of time, O bull of the Bharata race, making thee the sole cause, the assembled Kshatriyas of the world will be destroyed, O Bharata, for the sins of Duryodhana Vaisampayana said,--That bull among men, Duryodhana, continued to dwell in that, assembly house (of the Pandavas).
Besides this, O king, I have no other beneficial words to utter, O chastiser of foes, everything that should be learnt in this world is already known to thee.
Having caused that river to flow, Vibhatsu, that slayer of hostile heroes and bull among men, addressing Vasudeva said, Yonder, O Krishna, the standard of the Sutas son is visible.
Be silent before me, O Vandin!
Skanda replied, Thou, O Sakra, art my sovereign, as also of the three worlds; mayst thou be prosperous!
Dhritarashtra said, That which thou tellest me, O Suta, about the battle, fierce and terrible, between the one and the many, and the victory of that illustrious one, that story of the prowess of Subhadras son is highly wonderful and almost incredible.
O Bharata, viz., that the Sutas son of great prowess, alone and unsupported in that battle, fought with all those bowmen who contended with him to the utmost of their prowess, and checked all those Pandava warriors, O monarch, with his shafts.
Still both those heroes were respected by me, O son of Radha, at thy word!
Therefore, O lord, I think, peace with the Pandavas is for our good.
We know, O Vidura, of whom thou art really fond.
And smitten with sorrow, O Suyodhana, he indulged in these lamentations, Where shall I find affluent friends?
And Kasyapa said, If thou art so minded, bite thou then, O king of snakes, this tree.
Possessed of great might and great prowess Baladeva then proceeded to that tirtha where the adorable Grandsire had created the mountains called Lokaloka, where that foremost of Rishis, Arshtishena of rigid vows, O thou of Kurus race, had by austere penances acquired the status of Brahmanhood, where the royal sage Sindhudwipa, and the great ascetic Devapi, and the adorable and illustrious Muni Vishvamitra of austere penances and fierce energy, had all acquired a similar status.
They, however, that are wise, observant of virtue, and desirous of doing good unto all living creatures, they, acquainted with the real nature of the appearance of creatures in this world, attain at last to the highest end.’ 4 Dhritarashtra said, ‘O foremost speakers, how may the wilderness of this world be known?
Beholding those Rakshasas, O king, those ascetics of rigid vows made great endeavours for rescuing the Sarasvati from that plight.
29 Dhritarashtra said, I have heard from thee, O Sanjaya, of many poignant and unbearable griefs as also of the losses sustained by my sons.
Vaisampayana said, Then, O king, the mighty son of Bharadyaja presented himself before Drupada, and addressing that monarch, said, Know me for thy friend.
Blest be thou, O Ajatasatru.
Indeed, O Brahmana, I cannot say, Let Draupadi become the common wife of five brothers.
Act, however, now according to my words, O king!
And he, O king!
Therefore, O sire, keep my counsel and exterminate my foes by a clever device.
Narada said, Listen, O king, with calmness to me as I tell thee what I have heard and seen in that ascetic retreat.
See, O Vasava, sore inflicted with the whip, and harassed exceedingly, he is unable to bear his burthen.
Yudhishthira said, Doth thy peace, O king, thy self-restraint, thy tranquillity of heart, grow?
Tell me this, O mighty-armed one, if thou thinkest that I can listen to it without impropriety!’ 27 The end of Stri-parva on thy bounty.
Beholding those tokens of delight that Kesava manifested, Dhananjaya, O king, with heart in grief, addressed him, saying, O slayer of Madhu, thou showest great joy at a time scarcely fit for it, indeed on an occasion for sorrow caused by the death of Hidimvas son.
Think also, O king, of the wonderful knowledge of weapons that Drona will display in battle when I leave this place for going to Arjuna.
Thou hast, with thy own eyes, O Sanjaya, seen the whole earth, with even her Mlecchas and nomad tribes, depend upon his grace!
Now, O mighty king, have I been delivered by thy brother Bhima.
Endued with self-restraint and asceticism and great energy, the child grew up, O monarch, into a person of highly agreeable features like Soma himself.
But, O Vahnni, as I do not accept the libation of Soma if offered by a foe, and as I do not strike the weak with my thunderbolt, Vritra seemed to triumph over me for a time.
These the chief of the Yakshas speedily obtained there, O thou of mighty arms!
O thou that art conversant with every duty, be thou gratified with the child whose friends and kinsmen have all been slain and who himself knows nothing of what has happened.
Arjuna, and Bhimasena, and the two sons of Madri by Pandu, and the Pancala prince Dhrishtadyumna, and the unvanquished Shikhandi, and Uttamaujas, and Yudhamanyu, and the mighty car-warrior Satyaki, and the (five) sons of Draupadi, and those amongst the Pancalas, O king, that were yet alive, and all the Pandavas, and all their elephants, and foot-soldiers by hundreds upon hundreds, all proceeded with Yudhishthira.
Having duly bowed unto him, O bull among kings, they said these words, O monarch, from desire of doing good unto Kartikeya.
And we have served our superiors and subdued our The king said, It seemeth, O possessor of divine energy, that thou art no human being.
Vaishampayana continued, Hearing these cruel words, Dhritarashtra, that ruler of men, fell down, O monarch, on the earth, deprived of his senses.
It was, therefore, O monarch, that he blazed not forth, while consuming the forest of Khandava, for the destruction of Mandapalas children.
Raising him and embracing him closely, the king smelt his head and once more said these words unto him, O Dhananjaya, O thou of mighty arms, I have been greatly honoured by thee.
Kripa was installed as the preceptor and Parikshit was made over to him as his disciple, O chief of Bharata’s race.
Janamejaya said,--O thou foremost of all conversant with the Vedas, how did that game at dice take place, fraught with such evil to the cousins and through which my grand-sires, the son of Pandu, were plunged into such sorrow?
Therefore, O thou best of Brahmanas, cast thou this fire of thy wrath into the waters.
and beating their breasts, they cried aloud and wept and uttered loud shrieks, O monarch!
At present, however, O king, thou hast not inspired love in me by any act of thine, nor have I myself been plunged into distress.
Their nails were long, their teeth were large and their lips also, O Bharata, were protruding.
Janamejaya said, After having conferred that boon on Utanka, O foremost of regenerate persons, what did the mighty-armed Govinda of great celebrity next do?
Having obtained that inexhaustible wealth belonging to thee, O bull of Bharatas race, those highly blessed ones, whose foe had been slain, uttered loud cries of exultation.
Those two ancient Daityas, Taraka and Viprachitti of great energy, were in ancient times, O king, slain by the aid of acts and means!
And that lady of sweet smiles told those ascetics, O Bharata, all that had happened to herself with the minutest details, O mighty-armed one, about her abduction, and her rejection by Salwa.
And, O king, Yayati also begot on Devayani two sons called Yadu and Turvasu, who were like Indra and Vishnu.
Even now I am uneasy, O carpenter; I, indeed, dread him even now.
Bhima said, Welcome, O beauteous lady, Except the glad tidings thou bringest me, I need, O thou of exceeding beauty, no other aid whatever.
I have, however, O hero, a compact to make with Vaikartana, and that is this: I will utter whatever words I may wish, in this ones presence.
And thus equipt, they rushed, O king at each other, like two lions in the deep forest, both seeking the companionship of the same lioness in her season.
O foremost of superior Brahmanas, the course of Time is very subtle and difficult to understand, inasmuch as Kunti, abandoning sovereignty, became desirous of taking up her abode in the forest.
Sanjaya said, Hear, O king, how we and the enemy both stood for battle on that occasion and what was then the strength of the two armies.
Taking thee, O Kaurava, to heaven, I will grant thee there all my celestial weapons.
Seeing her pale and plunged in anxiety, the righteous-souled Vasishtha, that foremost of men, O king, said these words unto her.
I do not, O thou of Dasarathas race, see king Yudhishthira the just.
Then Dronas son, O monarch, with tearful eyes and breathing like a snake, said these words unto that chief of Bharatas race, that foremost of all the kings on earth, Truly, there is nothing stable in the world of men, since thou, O tiger among men, liest on the bare earth, stained with dust!
Come to me, O timid one, wedding me, O beautiful one, according to the Gandharva form.
Then, O Bharata, thy troops, beholding Bhima mace in hand, thought that Yama himself, armed with his fatal bludgeon, was in their midst.
The son of Kunti will certainly slay many of our foremost Dhritarashtra said, Tell me, O Sanjaya, the distinctive indications of the cars of all those who, excited with wrath and headed by Bhimasena, had proceeded against Drona.
Tell me this, O Janardana.
O scorcher of foes, I shall employ myself in doing what is agreeable to thee.
O chastiser of enemies, have the fates been propitious unto us?
Do thou, O Karna, proceed against him, for there is no other bowman (among us that can do so).
O my lord!
Thou knowest, O holy one, that the regions created for me were all eternal.
Arjuna said, I am pleased with thee, O tiger among men.
After they had returned, O king, and separately taken up their positions in well-formed array, an awful battle set in, in which blood flowed freely like water.
See O Matali, if there is anybody here whom thou canst elect.
Thou art my older sister, O let me have thy sanction.
What, indeed, wilt thou, O Janardana, say of this great feat of Arjuna while speaking of it in the midst of assemblies.
Arjuna said, Impelled by whom, O son of the Vrishni race, doth a man commit sin, even though unwilling and as if constrained by force?
Kanwa continued, In the same way, O son of Gandhari, thou livest, O son, as long as thou approachest not the heroic sons of Pandu in battle.
Tell me quickly, O blessed lady, what that object is upon which thou hast set thy heart!
Cherishing that hope within his heart, he said unto Karna, O Sutas son, Partha never wishes to fight, standing before thee!
And the god of a thousand eyes (Indra) suddenly abstained from giving rain in his territory; so that his people began to suffer and O lord of the earth!
O king, it was about this time that Drona heard that the illustrious Brahmana Jamadagnya, that slayer of foes, that foremost one among all wielders of weapons, versed in all kinds of knowledge, had expressed a desire of giving away all his wealth to Brahmanas.
O thou of mighty arms, through thy grace, we will sleep happily this night.
The noise made by the cars of those impetuous warriors who proceeded with great speed, became very loud, O monarch, and touched the heavens.
These and many other omens, foreshadowing fear and danger, were seen, O king, and filled the hearts of men with anxiety.
Conversant with what are the vital limbs of the body, the son of Pritha, however, O monarch, with the greatest ease, struck the ruler of the Madras with four and ten cloth-yard shafts, aiming at the latters vital limbs.
80 Sanjaya said, Then, O king, Dhananjaya, desirous of rescuing Kuntis son Bhima who, assailed by many, foremost of warriors of the Kuru army, seemed to sink (under that attack), avoided, O Bharata, the troops of the Sutas son and began, with his shafts, to despatch those hostile heroes (that were opposed to Bhima) to the regions of death.
Before my eyes, O mighty-armed one, making the very hair stand on end, violent were the blows that thou hadst to bear, O delighter of the Yadavas!
As people are certainly burnt if they come in contact with a blazing fire, even so the Srinjayas, O Bharata, were burnt by the Karna-fire when they came in contact with it.
Samvarta said, If, O prince of the Devas, thou art pleased with us, do thou thyself give all the directions for this sacrifice, and O Surendra, thyself ordain the sacrificial portions (for the gods), so that, O god, all the world may know that it hath been done by thee.
And, O protector of men!
O king, cause Vandin to be brought to my presence.
Then thy army, O bull of Bharatas race, mangled in diverse ways with shafts by the Pandavas eager for victory, began to fly away from the field.
Let the affection thou hadst for the Pandavas be revived in thy bosom, and let it, O bull of Bharatas race, lead to the establishment of peace.
But thereupon a quantity of air alone came out of the illustrious Rishis stomach, with a sound that was as loud, O child, as the roar of the clouds.
During the progress of that great carnage, Govinda, beholding the field of battle, addressed Savyasaci, saying, Behold, O Partha, how great and awful is this carnage, O Bharata, of Kshatriyas on Earth for the sake of Duryodhana.
But, O thou who art conversant with the rules of morality, is not this still more wrongful that that great person, viz., Kansa, whose food this one ate, hath been slain by him?
O lord of the earth!
Where hast thou been, O sinless one, and whence the cause of this thy mental disquietude?
And a very large number of combatants, O Bharata, lost their weapons, or had their thighs broken.
Confined in the temple of Shiva and offered as sacrifice unto him like so many animals, do not these monarchs dedicated unto that god feel the most poignant misery, O bull of the Bharata race?
But, O Brahmana, do not disclose this fact to anybody, for if it be known, persons desirous of obtaining this power, will, from curiosity, always trouble my sons.
O thou of mighty arms, they that fight with warriors more eminent than themselves, have this duty to perform.
As regards myself, O bull of Bharatas race, the fame of these Kurus, as also of all the Pandavas, I will spread.
It was for this disguise, O king, that no one could recognise him as Dhananjaya.
Dhritarashtra said, Tell me what may be done by a person that is sleepless and burning with anxieties, for thou alone amongst us, O child, art versed in both religion and profit.
This shorn earth, O king, now exists for thee!
Though devoted to the performance of his duties, this, however, is the resolution, O Bharata, that he formed: This Sarasvati shall quickly bring, by force of her current, that foremost of ascetics, Vasishtha, to my presence.
Those two repressors of foes thus encountering each other in dreadful battle and thus striking each other, O king, both fell down on the field.
It behoveth none else, save thee, O Lord of the Past and the Future, to destroy those wicked wights that show no regard for any one.
Loud cries of woe arose from among thy troops, O monarch, whilst they were being slaughtered by Dharmas son, O sire, with diverse kinds of keen shafts equipped with Kanka feathers and whetted on stone, with numerous broad-headed arrows, and with diverse kinds of darts and swords and clubs.
Everything that hath happened seemeth to be due to Destiny, O Sanjaya.
The women, O king, crying ceaselessly, caused the earth to resound with their voices like a flight of she-ospreys.
Having slain, countless warriors, this Satyaki cometh to thee, O Partha, freed from amid the Kaurva troops, like a lion from amid a herd of kine.
And, O bull among Kshatriyas, my affection and love for thee have grown with me in consequence of our having sported together in childhood in the hermitage.
He, O Bharata, is the beginning, the middle, and the end of all creatures.
O Panchali, let them for thy sake declare in the midst of these respectable men that Yudhishthira is not their lord, let them thereby make king Yudhishthira the just a liar.
O regenerate one, the worship that sons offer to their mothers and fathers and that wives offer to their husbands, both seem to me to be highly difficult.
Rising up in haste after worshipping the feet of Vyasa bending his head, Keshava, O monarch, addressed Dhritarashtra, saying, I take my leave, O foremost one of Kurus race!
Then commenced the battle, O monarch, of men, elephants, steeds, and cars, engaged in destroying one another.
And O son of Parikshit!
Hearing such words from thee, as also from the preceptor, O Bharata, I would then have, with Karna, reflected upon what course I should pursue.
Thus addressed by those brave warriors, Subalas son Shakuni, O king, proceeded to that spot where thy son was staying, surrounded on all sides by unretreating heroes.
He addressed Arjuna, saying, ‘O thou of great intelligence, it is Time that cooks every creature (in his cauldron).
Let thy anxiety be dispelled, O Sutas son.
That grave act also which was ordained in heaven is known to thee, How then, O Partha, can peace be concluded with the foe?
O Chief of all intelligent men, O son of Kunti, the intelligence of this wicked-minded king of the Chedis, as also of all these monarchs, hath become perverse.
The End of Vana Parva Vaisampayana said, Listen, O lord of men, how thy great grandfathers passed the period of unrecognition in the city of Virata.
Those sounds, O king, first uttered by the sacrificing Rishi, penetrated into heaven, and Trita completed that sacrifice after the manner laid down by utterers of Brahma.
(His sister) Subhadra, noticing that the slaughter of her son had not been mentioned, addressed her brother, saying,--Do thou narrate the death of my son, O Krishna--and fell down on the earth (in a swoon).
Look, O Matali, if there be any bridegroom here, that is distinguished by the possession of superior merits, for then I will go to him for respectfully soliciting him to accept thy daughter.
O son of Kunti, do thou together with thy ministers, touch (the waters) of this lake called Punya, and this mountain Bhrigutunga and also (the water of) these two rivers, called Tushniganga.
And, O Bharata, the son of the god of Justice, the royal Yudhishthira of high soul then called together all his younger brothers and addressed them, saying, Exiled from our kingdom, we have passed twelve years.
O monarch, it is clear that the ruler of the Salwas waiteth (for me).
But, O Krishna, I dare not, for my own glorification, falsify thy words.
Sanjaya continued, Having said these words unto the king deprived of his senses and lying with broken thighs, Ashvatthama once more cast his eyes on him and uttered these words, If, O Duryodhana, thou hast any life in thee still, listen to these words that are so pleasant to hear.
Savyasaci, O monarch, caused thy army to tremble and reel like a tempest-tossed boat exposed on the bosom of the ocean.
45 Shalya said, The abandonment of the afflicted and the sale of wives and children are, O Karna, prevalent amongst the Angas whose king thou art.
The severed head of Namuchi thereupon pursued Indra from behind, saying unto him from a near point these words, O slayer of a friend, O wretch!
Sanjaya continued, Hearing these words of Bhishma, king Duryodhana then asked Drona, O monarch, that foremost one of Angiras race, saying, O preceptor, in what time canst thou annihilate the troops of Pandus son?
Our animals are all cheerless and seem, O king, to be crying.
Behold then, O son of Pandu, the well-equipped car of Karna.
Sauti said, Then the king of Gandharvas (the father of Pramadvara) and the celestial messenger, both of excellent qualities, went to the god Dharma (the Judge of the dead) and addressed him, saying, If it be thy will, O Dharmaraja, let the amiable Pramadvara, the betrothed wife of Ruru, now lying dead, rise up with a moiety of Rurus life.
And seeing them gone, Bhishma, the grandfather of the Kurus, hung down his head from shame, and then, O king, went to his own quarters.
Our acts do not become successful in consequence of destiny alone, nor of exertion alone, O best of men!
Let him come at me like the wind assailing the mountains, till, with my keen arrows, O son of Kunti, I quell his rage and desire for battle and take his life.
It behoveth thee not, O Gandhari, to impute any fault to me.
And seeing the abode of Kuvera and the Rakshasas, lying slain on the ground, the king addressed his brother who was seated, saying, Either it be through rashness, or through ignorance, thou hast, O Bhima, committed a sinful act.
And, O messenger of the gods, what constitutes happiness in heaven, and what are the disadvantages thereof?
And what, O child, is that which thou wilt do in order to live in disguise.
I shall, however, O chastiser of foes, first remove to Indraprastha the women of the Vrishni race as also the children and the aged.’ Having said so unto his uncle, Arjuna next addressed Daruka, saying, ‘I wish to see without any delay the chief officers of the Vrishni heroes.’ Having uttered these words, the heroic Arjuna, grieving for those great car-warriors (who had been slain), entered the great hall of the Yadavas (where they used to hold their court), called Sudharma.
All of us, therefore, O Lord of creatures, shall dwell by thy side, on regulated diet and observant of austere penances!
Devoted to truth, Vidura addressed him, saying, By good luck, O son, thou livest amid this general destruction of the Kurus!
As regards Arjuna, although he was resisted by all means, O Bharata, he still compelled thy son to turn back and then crushed thy troops.
Salya said, If, having resolved on fight, thou hadst not come to me (thus), I would have, O king, cursed thee for thy overthrow in battle.
If the day expire, O foremost of men, victory, O Karna, will certainly be ours!
The encounter then that took place between the Vrishni and the Pancala warriors in that battle became exceedingly fierce, like that between two hawks, O king, for a piece of meat.
O thou best and foremost of all Deities, thou must slay us at a spot that is absolutely uncovered.
But tell the Brahmana, O mother, that he doth not do anything whereby the dwellers in this town may know all about it, and make him promise to keep thy request.
The Earth then, O lord of Earth, seemed to me to be made one entire expanse of arrows by thy son Duryodhana, that bowman possessed of great lightness of hands.
27 28 Sanjaya said, King Duryodhana, O monarch, himself fearlessly received Yudhishthira, as the latter was engaged in shooting large numbers of shafts.
O Grandsire of all the worlds, it behoveth me not to ask any one else.
Bards and eulogists applauded Shakra after the fall of Vritra, even as we are now applauding thee, O Bharata, after the fall of thy foes!
Yudhishthira said, Come, O Arjuna, let the horse, O hero, be protected by thee.
It behoveth thee, O Brahmana, to pardon us!
Steeds fleet as the wind, still attached to yokes of cars (but without drivers to guide them) were seen to drag car-warriors, O monarch, hither and thither on the field of battle.
Vaisampayana continued, While giving way to such reflections Duryodhana spoke unto Dussasana thus: O Dussasana, listen to these words of mine, O thou of the Bharata race!
Beholding them both stain, their followers, O king, filled with rage rushed (towards Arjuna), scattering hundreds of arrows.
In that case, O king of the world, ourselves with our children, excluded from the royal line, shall certainly be disregarded by all men.
Having offered worship to thy preceptor, that foremost of all wielders of bows, tell him, O king, that Dhrishtadyumna hath been slain by me.
It was for this, O Partha, that the king in great wrath said those harsh words to thy face.
It is known to me, O Sanjaya, that if a man can have every wish of his heart without having to do anything, he would hardly like to do anything even though it might be of the least troublesome kind, far less would he engage in war.
O perpetuator of Kurus race, I think that receiving the touch of thy hand, which resembles nectar in its vivifying effects I have been restored to my senses.
By good luck, thou art a hero, O thou of Kurus race, and, by good luck, thou art conversant with battle, since, single-handed, thou wishest to meet all of us in battle!
Reflecting on this, act, O king Yudhishthira the just.
O Bhimasena, terrified with the force of thy arms, let all the Rakshasas betake themselves to the ten cardinal points, leaving the mountain.
And, O Rakshasa, thou shalt no longer slay human beings for thy food.
There, in days of yore, Soma himself, O king of kings, had performed the Rajasuya sacrifice.
Having fought for a little while, Shakuni, the son of Subala, O monarch, went away from that spot with the remnant of his cavalry numbering 6,000.
Yudhishthira said, What was that occasion, O Saint?
I desire, O Brahmana, to hear all this in detail from thee.
Covered with steeds slain with their riders, with broken shields and lances, O monarch, and with swords and darts and spears all around, the Earth looked variegated as if strewn with flowers.
Being, as thou art, only a crow, how canst thou, O fool, challenge a swan endued with might, capable of going everywhere at will, and doing large distances in course of his flight?
O twice-born one, listen as I briefly recite it all.
It was, therefore, O son, that I was applauding the Pandavas in Viduras presence, so that he might not know even by a sign what is in my mind.
Vaisampayana continued, Then, O descendant of Bharata, the king spoke of his meeting with Duryodhana and gave a detailed account regarding that promise of his and that boon granted by himself.
And the battle then, O Bharata, that ranged between the active and agile Gandharvas and the impetuous son of Pandu was fierce in the extreme.
O my sons, I do not desire the fruits of that sovereignty which has been won by my children.
O Grandsire, now what I should do that my sacrifice may not be obstructed and my subjects may not be injured.
Do you, however, O Yudhishthira, fight me one at a time!
All of us then, O best of persons, together going to Bhishma without delay, will speedily ask him of Kurus race his advice.
And, O king, that mansion looked resplendent with those assembled kings like heaven itself with a conclave of the celestials of great good fortune.
Having duly completed those hundred sacrifices, O chief of the Bharatas, Shakra of great splendour came to be called by the name of Satakratu.
Satyabhama and other dear wives of Krishna entered the woods, O king, resolved to set themselves to the practice of penances.
Thou hast, O princess, many maids under thee.
And he said, How, O illustrious one, can one woman become the wife of many men without being defiled by sin?
It was thus, O king, that mighty and illustrious Garuda, the son of Vinata, afflicted by the might of Vishnu, was cured of his pride.
And, O Panchala, if it pleaseth thee, know me hence for thy friend.
Except thy life, O hero, tell us what boon we may grant thee.
During those years, king Drupada, O monarch, paid his adoration to the god Sankara for the sake of offspring, resolving in his mind to compass my destruction and practising the austerest of penances.
Then stupefying all sides, O king, with his shafts, Karna deeply afflicted Yudhishthira the just.
Amid that roaring and shouting and wailing army of men and elephants and steeds, the twang of Gandiva, O monarch, rose high.
Even this, O mighty-armed one, is what I think to be suitable to this hour.
And, O sinless one, addressing the high-souled king Yudhishthira, the just, the Rishi said, Tell me, O foremost of virtuous men, what it is that thou seekest and what I can do for thee.
In such a contest, O Krishna., the dog that is stronger, vanquishing his antagonist, taketh the latters meat.
Today, O Vrikodara, I shall beat out of thee thy desire for battle!
The horse-sacrifice, O king, is a cleanser of all sins.
Then, O king, many leaders of the Kuru army, such as Duryodhana and Karna and Vrishasena and the ruler of the Sindhus himself, rushed with speed, O king, against Arjuna whose shafts were never baffled and who was proceeding, on his car drawn by steeds of great fleetness.
And, O worst of mortals, surely thou art not worthy to sway the Vaisampayana continued, Then there arose a confused murmur amongst the spectators approving of Duryodhanas speech.
I do not, O Kesava, know how king Yudhishthira the Just is.
And having heard it, O tiger among kings, ordain that which should follow.
But, O lord of the earth, considering that thy mind is distracted, thou mayst desert me.
Then the Trigartas, the Daravas, the Kokonadas, and various other Kshatriyas, O king, advanced against the son of Pandu.
the Pandavas, O tiger among men, was fierce in the extreme, like that between two hawks for a piece of flesh.
Go, O son of Kunti, and represent, O Bharata, unto king Yudhishthira the just, this prowess of thine that is capable of procuring thee great fame and that hath become well-known in the world.
Reft almost entirely of friends and allies, of heroes and elephants, this earth exists for thee, O king!
Vrihadaswa said, O king, after Nala had gone away, the beauteous Damayanti, now refreshed, timorously awoke in that lonely forest.
Ye Rishis, do you know for certain what this one will bring forth?’ Hear now, O king, what those ascetics, attempted to be thus deceived, said: ‘This heir of Vasudeva, by name Samva, will bring forth a fierce iron bolt for the destruction of the Vrishnis and the Andhakas.
Diverse kinds of necessaries of life were given away in large measure and in diverse countries unto the weary and worn, children and the old, in response, O king, to solicitations.
And as a forest in the midst of the vernal season, assumes a grace only when it is swept over by the breeze, so, O father!
Arjuna said, O god among men, what service wilt thou take in Viratas kingdom?
And, O king, Charudeshna, Samva, and the mighty warrior Pradyumna, O descendant of the Kuru race, sailed out, ascending on their chariots, and clad in mail, and decked with ornaments, with colours flying, resolved to encounter the mighty and countless host of Salwa!
Addressing the dice-won princess of Pancala in the midst of the assembly, this Duhshasana, desirous of doing what was agreeable to his (elder) brother as also to Karna, O Janardana, had said, Thou art now the wife of a slave!
O thou of Bhrigus race, it was to myself that she said, I am Salwas!
Trouble thyself not, O king, I shall carry Panchalas daughter wherever she will be incapable of walking.
Eleven Akshauhinis, O Bharata, of troops had been assembled for thy son!
Do thou, O Dwaipayana, relate this unto me, O sinless one.
It behoveth thee, O holy one, to do that which is consistent with reason.
Thy troops, at that time, O Bharata, ventured to even gaze at that warrior who was battling in that fashion and slaying thy men in that way.
The latter, observing the Rishi sitting under the tree, questioned him, O king, saying, O best of Brahmanas, which way have the thieves taken?
He who has been spoken of as Kshetrajna is I myself, O Dhananjaya!
Dhritarashtra replied, This, O Duryodhana, is the very thought existing in my mind.
Is that person, O Sanjaya, worthy of honour who behaveth thus towards a man possessed of glory endued with prosperity, living in the midst of friends?
I shall assuredly slay thee in battle with all thy followers soon enough, it thou, O son of Suvala, stayest in the light pursuant to the Kshatriya usage.
16 17 18 Gandhari said, ‘Behold, O Madhava, my century of sons, incapable of fatigue (from exertion in battle), have all been slain by Bhimasena with his mace in battle!
O Bharata, arose from among thy warriors, while some illustrious Kshatriyas among the routed combatants, desirous of victory, cried out saying, Stop, stop!
It behoveth thee, therefore, O lord of men, to give us instructions, O monarch, as to what we should next do in the search after the sons of Pandu.
It behoveth thee, O regenerate one, to describe to me the investiture of Kumara (by the gods).
I say, O king, that which I regard to be beneficial.
And, O most praiseworthy of men, desirous of extinguishing his sins by leading an austere life, and (thereby) obtaining the favour of the (goddess) Ganga, he visited that foremost of mountains--Himalaya.
Do thou therefore, O most valorous of men, assent to my departure.
They will, O hero, search the whole earth with her forests and hills and seas, her villages and towns and cities and mines.
O valiant one, hear what I submit to Yudhishthira said, O foremost of monarchs, I wish to know how it was that great and unparalleled misery had to be endured by the illustrious Indra together with his queen.
9 Janamejaya said, After the holy Vyasa had departed, what, O regenerate sage, did king Dhritarashtra, do?
And Yudhishthira said, O Kshatta, thy mind seemeth to be cheerless.
At this, Prana and Apana and Udana and Samana addressed him, saying, Thou art not the foremost among us, O Vyana!
And Nahusha, having seen her, smilingly addressed her, saying, I welcome thee, O lady of lovely thighs.
Therefore, O Hidimva, go thou the way on which thy brother hath gone.
With Sahadeva and Nakula and Arjuna, O lady, enter our household now!
O fool, in consequence of thy envy and hatred for heroes, thou always, seemest to be like a jackal.
O tiger among men, thou shouldst regard thy task as accomplished if only thou disablest those hostile kings.
And O king, Janardana beholding the monarch tired, addressed Bhima of terrible deeds, and as if to stimulate him said,--O son of Kunti, a foe that is fatigued cannot be pressed for if pressed at such a time he may even die.
By his devotion, O scorcher of foes, rendering to hint the obedience due from a disciple to a preceptor, Kasyapa gratified that Brahmana who possessed all these accomplishments and was endued, besides, with scriptural learning and excellent conduct.
And these two, Brahman and Mrityu, O king, have their seats in the souls of all creatures, and remaining unseen, they, without doubt, wage war with each other.
Indeed, O king, I shall have to encounter in battle many warriors difficult of being resisted.
Besides these, there are rivers, by hundreds and thousands, that are not known (by names), I have now recounted to thee, O king, all the rivers as far as I remember.
With Bhimasenas leave, Dhananjaya then proceeded (once more against his foes), causing the earth and the welkin, O Bharata, to resound with the rattle of his car.
O son of Pritha, do thou carry out what thou thinkest should be done after this.
With thy youth, O son, I like to enjoy the pleasure of life.
Dhritarashtra said, Tell me, O Sanjaya, how Yuyudhana rushed against the son of Bharadwaja in battle.
Thou hast become cleansed, O highly blessed one.
The high-souled Vidura, O sire, told me many a time that as long as life remained in Dhritarashtras son, he would never give us our share of the kingdom!
And, O king, this fire began to issue out of Vrikodaras ears and other senses with smoke and sparks and flames.
Blessed be thou, with all thy brothers, O bull among the sons of Pandu.
O king, through the ill-feeling of kings, the people be slaughtered.
Vaisampayana continued, Unto him, O Janamejaya, Govinda of gratified soul said these words,--Do thou ask for some boon Unto him Utanka, however, said--Even this is a sufficient boon from thee for the present, O thou of great splendour, in that, O Krishna, I have beheld this form of thine, O foremost of all beings.
If, O god, I give thee this coat of mail and ear-rings, then I am sure to meet with destruction, and thou shalt also undergo ridicule!
O Ulupi, our ever-victorious husband slain in battle, through thee, by my son of tender years.
Those eight, O king, in the world of men, are indications of heaven.
Bhishma said, I then placed the matter before (my mother) Kali, otherwise called Gandhavati, as also all our counsellors, and also before our special and ordinary priests and then permitted, O king, the eldest of those maidens, Amva, to depart.
Do thou therefore, O Karna, with myself and other brave and mighty car-warriors, with Dronas son and the ruler of the Madras and Kripa fight with Partha in battle, exerting thyself with the greatest firmness and resolution.
Rejected she hath been by Salwa, because thou, O Bharata, hadst abducted her.
Ascertaining the opinion of Vidura, Dhritarashtra the son of Amvika, calling Duryodhana told him again in private--O son of Gandhari, Duryodhana replied,--I am a sinful wretch, O king, because I eat and dress beholding (the prosperity of the foes).
Ashtaka said, If there are worlds for me to enjoy, as fruits of my religious merits, in heaven, O king, I give them all unto thee.
By good luck, O thou of wicked soul, I see thee today!
At thy approach, O invincible one, a delightful breeze hath begun to blow, bearing the sweet scent of thy person.
O sinless one, I harbour no resentment in my heart on account of the wrongs done to us by Suyodhana.
And, O son of Pandu, the wicked king, stationing his forces in array, besieged that city around and above.
O fisherman, from this day Vaisampayana continued, Having said this, Bhishma helped the beautiful maiden into his chariot.
O sinless one, O chief of regenerate ones, I desire thee to recite in detail all about this, which, indeed, was the cause of the destruction of the world.
King Matsyas commander, Kichaka of wicked soul, by whom the Trigartas, O monarch, were repeatedly vanquished and slain with mighty force, now lieth low on the ground with all his brothers, slain, O monarch, by invisible Gandharvas during the hours of darkness, O thou of unfading glory.
Struck, O monarch, by those firm bowmen, the Pandavas, the Kuru army fled away on all sides, inspired with fear.
And the fourteenth year, O monarch, when the Pandavas returned and claimed their property, they did not obtain it.
Indeed, repairing quickly to Gautamas asylum, O king, he presented those ear-rings unto the wife of his preceptor, O sinless one.
And there also came, O thou slayer of all foes, Pulastya and Pulaha, and Kratu the performer of many great sacrifices, all influenced by the desire of saving the Rakshasas.
Having undergone the final bath, the king addressed the regenerate Astika who had sprung from the race of the Yayavaras and who was the son of Jaratkaru, and said these words,--O Astika said, The performer of that sacrifice in which the ancient Rishi, the Island-born Vyasa, that vast receptacle of penances, is present, is sure, O foremost one of Kurus race, to conquer both the worlds.
O Karna, be it as thou wishest!
Today is the seventeenth day of this awful battle, O Bharata, of those that are being slaughtered in the midst of this fight.
Thou wilt then see, O Bharata, what I will achieve in battle.
Bhishma said, Thus addressed, O king, by that messenger, king Drupada, like a thief caught (in the act), could not speak.
26 Sanjaya said, After that elephant-division had been destroyed, O Bharata, by the son of Pandu, and while thy army was being thus slaughtered by Bhimasena in battle, beholding the latter, that chastiser of foes, careering like the all-killing Destroyer himself in rage armed with his club, the remnant of thy unslaughtered sons, those uterine brothers, O king, united together at that time when he of Kurus race, thy son Duryodhana, could not be seen, and rushed against Bhimasena.
O my son, O afflicter of foes, thou knowest in fact everything relating to this world.
When Karna ceased, Duryodhanas second brother Dussasana, wedded to a sinful disposition, then addressed his eldest brother and said, O monarch, O lord of men, let those spies only in whom we have confidence, receiving their rewards in advance, once more go after the search.
Yudhishthira answered, O Dhananjaya of Bharatas race, do thou take up Panchali and carry her.
Vaisampayana continued, Relating her woes thus, O Bharata, unto Bhimasena, Krishna began to weep silently, casting her eyes on Bhima.
O ye of immeasurable strength!
Then Satyaki, O king, applauded the son of Pandu.
Hearing these words of Shalya, O lord of Earth, and beholding Duryodhana overpowered by Bhima in that dreadful battle, the valiant son of Radha, thus urged by the words of Shalya and exceedingly desirous of rescuing the king, left Ajatasatru and the twin sons of Madri by Pandu, and rushed for rescuing thy son.
And, O Parasara, Viswamitra was only a blind instrument in that matter.
Upon the recommencement of the battle after the withdrawal of the troops, how, O Sanjaya, did Vikarnas son Karna fight?
The mighty car-warriors of the Pandavas, O monarch, were completely shrouded with shafts, decked with gold, that were sped from Karnas bow.
Even if the wielder of the thunderbolt himself aid him in battle, people, O Madhava, shall yet behold him slain today!
Their foes, O queen, the Pandavas, too, have not been more fortunate.
Marutta said, O Fire-god, is the glorious Lord of the Celestials happy, and is he pleased with us, and are the other gods loyal to him?
These and many other mighty companions, O king, came to the high-souled and illustrious Kartikeya.
And shooting continuous line of arrows in all directions, that hero of rigid vows smote the Pandava car-warriors naming each beforehand, O Bharata.
O thou of mighty arms, shall I ever behold again Nakula of mine, that mighty car-warrior, that delicate youth brought up in every luxury and undeserving of woe?
16 Sanjaya said, Then, O lord, thy troops, with Shalya at their head, once more rushed against the Parthas in that battle with great impetuosity.
Vasudeva said, With thy own powers of illusion, O Bharata, destroy this illusion of Duryodhana who is an adept in it!
Let men and women, O Vrihannala, laugh at me.
Thyself, too, O king, dost not seem to be in thy usual frame of mind.
Therefore, O Bharata, after my mission becomes successful, thou mayest entertain me and my attendants.
Hence, O great Indra, I shall not abandon this dog today from desire of my happiness.
O Karna, surrounded by thy brothers, thou wilt, without doubt, blaze forth like Brahma Himself, surrounded by the gods on the platform of a great sacrifice.
Sitting by the side of his mother, Yudhishthira asked her in private, What is the task, O mother, that Bhima of terrible prowess seeketh to accomplish?
O pacify thy anger and preserve us.
The gods never like human beings engage in work, O bull of the Bharata race, from desire, or wrath, or covetousness, or envy.
If Krishna in his infancy slew a vulture, what is there remarkable in that, or in that other feat of his, O Bhishma, viz., in his slaughter of Aswa and Vrishava, both of whom were unskilled in battle?
This is the final deliberation of us all, O thou who hearest with thy eyes!
The other kings honoured him by bidding him welcome, and then all of them said unto Rama, Witness this encounter, O thou of mighty arms!
Peace, therefore, if properly proposed, O lord, may be concluded.
O foremost of warriors, protect us incomparably, even as Skanda protected the gods in battle.
Utanka said, Do thou, O Kesava, tell me that faultless Adhyatma.
In their eyes, O dear son, amongst the Kurus ourselves and the Pandavas are equal.
O thou of wicked soul, thou too art a practiser of such feline behaviour.
Terrible Kankas and vultures, and cranes and hawks and ravens, O king, tempted by the prospect of food, proceeded in advance of his car, and indicated auspicious omens foreboding the destruction of the hostile host and the slaughter of Karna.
Then embracing him once more with affection and smelling his head, the son of Pandu, exceedingly gratified, applauded his brother Jaya and said, O thou of mighty arms, in the very sight of all the troops, my armour, standard, bow, dart, steeds, and arrows, were cut off in battle, O great bowman, by Karna with his shafts, although I exerted myself with care.
Yudhishthira said, How wilt thou, O Sahadeva, bear thyself before that king?
And, O mighty king, then Kshemavriddhi, the commander of Salwas forces, bore that shower of arrows, immovable as the Himavat!
Indeed, O king, thy warriors penetrated into the midst of the Pandava army like swans into a large lake.
There will I fight, O son of Virata, for there the battle will not be fruitless, Defeating him I will come back, taking away the kine.
Drona said, Victory, O king, is certain for thee that hast Hari for thy counsellor.
Thus did those councillors, instructed by Dhritarashtra, speak of Varanavata, and whilst they were so speaking, the Pandavas, O king, felt the desire of going to that delightful town.
Then, O best of kings, there once more commenced a battle between Karna and the Pandavas that swelled the population of Yamas kingdom.
Say, O Sanjaya, unto that lord, the blind king Dhritarashtra, that his son Duryodhana hath entered the depths of a lake!
O Bharata, there is another man in this world who can achieve what thou, O king, hast achieved in battle to-day with thy brothers.
As upon a single large tree there may be two boughs one of which beareth fruits while the other doth not, so from the self-same line of progenitors may spring persons that are imbecile as well as those that are endowed with great strength O thou bearing the sign of a plough on thy banner, I do not, in sooth, condemn the words thou hast spoken, but I simply condemn those, O son of Madhu, who are listening to thy words!
The Ocean, bowing down unto him, said, with joined hands,--Do not, O hero, shoot thy shafts (at me)!
The crow having said these words, one of the swans addressed him, Listen, O son of Radha, to the words that the swan said.
Whither then, O Karna, had this virtue of thine gone?
Tell me all this, O adorable one!
Therefore, tell me, O Sanjaya, for thou art skilled (in narration).
Sanjaya said, Through fear of the Parthas, O son of Kurus race, Ashvatthama could not achieve such a feat then.
Asked, however, by Karna (who saw him but knew him not), he said these words, Thou hadst sped me, O Karna, without having seen me.
Today, O monarch, the happiness of this wicked king of the Kurus hath come to an end!
O best ascetics, in this world the number of snakes baffles calculation, there being many thousands and millions of them.
Without doubt, it is difficult to learn the ways of Yama, since thou, O lord of all the worlds, thus liest on the bare ground, stained with dust!
Thus pierced, O monarch, by those mighty car-warriors, blood began to flow from Shalyas body, like crimson streams, running down the breast of a mountain of red chalk.
This hermitage, again, shall become the foremost of tirthas in the world, capable of cleansing from every sin, O thou of fair eye-brows, and shall be known by the name of Vadarapachana.
For the destruction of Ravana, O king, Vishnu, in his own body, took his birth as the son of illustrious Dasaratha.
I do not, O ruler of men, even upon reflection, find the warrior who may be a match for Shalya while engaged in fight.
And the mighty god of wind, thus invoked, came unto her, riding upon a deer, and said, What, O Kunti, am I to give thee?
O bull among men, I am unable to brook this challenge.
O sire, the son of Pritha quickly went away from that spot, leaving that large division of his.
Hearing these disagreeable words of cruel import, the king, O chief of the Bharata race, was sorely afflicted and became utterly speechless!
Vidura said, Excess of pride, excess in speech, excess in eating, anger, the desire of enjoyment, and intestine dissensions,--these, O king, are six sharp swords that cut off the period of life allotted to creatures.
And, O high-souled one, order thou whatever else there is that remaineth to be done.
Then, O monarch, that mighty warrior my son, fired with wrath, challenged Vivindhya and discharged the weapon at him.
That which is thy purpose, that desire which for many long years thou hast cherished in thy heart, will be accomplished, O Karna.
O lord of birds thy energy is extraordinary, thy splendour is that of fire, thy brightness is like that of the lightning that no darkness can approach.
Piercing with great speed through his strong armour and body, that shaft entered the Earth, O king, like a snake penetrating into an ant-hill.
And, O thou of the Vrishni race, it is through thy grace that vast wealth had been got by me.
It is much, O king, that thou wishes to give unto Kesava as thy guest.
O Yajnasena, the establishment of this alliance with thee hath made them happier than if they had acquired a new kingdom.
The Brahmana continued, Unto Apana who said so, both Vyana and Udana said--O Apana, thou art not the foremost.
Do thou also listen to me, O mother.
Always thinking of Sahadevas plight, I cannot, O Bhimasena, obtain sleep,--what to speak you of the rest?
I will not, therefore, O king, fight as long as Gangas son liveth!
Slay that warrior, O thou of mighty arms, like Vasava slaying the Asura Namuchi.
And, O king, whence also doth she come?
And, O thou of unfailing prowess, the time hath come for the display of our Kshatriya virtue.
O slayer or Vala and Vritra.
O lord of men, for some time we followed in the wake of their charioteers.
O Sanjaya, why doth king Dhritarashtra now bewail, although he hath all this prosperity?
Even in the city of Virata, O child, we shall, O Bharata, spend this year, entering his service.
O king, these my husbands freed from the wretched state of bondage, will be able to achieve prosperity by their own virtuous acts!
Verily thou art not in thy wonted state, O son!
A great danger, O Kesava, hath approached us.
Slaying Karna today with thy keen shafts in battle, do thou, O giver of honours, give great happiness to Dharmas son.
If it pleases thee, O king, I will speak, and listen to my words, and, O son of Prishatas race, having listened to me, follow thy own inclination!
During the progress of that dreadful battle, O monarch, a great fear entered the hearts of thy warriors as also those of the Pandavas.
Then king Duryodhana, O Bharata, hurled a dart capable of slaying everybody, exceedingly keen, and resembling a large blazing brand.
O giver of honours, the king should further be informed at my request that he should do what is necessary for preventing a carnage similar to what took place at the time of presenting the Arghya (on the occasion of the Rajasuya-sacrifice).
There, O Bharata twenty car-warriors among the Pancalas and more than a hundred Cedi warriors were slain by Karna with his shafts.
will, O god, acquire in this world the most exalted state.
They are all soliciting thy presence, O Govinda, like the celestials in heaven desiring the presence of Sakra himself,--thus addressed, Govinda greeted them both with sweet and courteous enquiries.
O thou of mighty arms, I heard all this about thee from Narada as also from Krishna-Dwaipayana!
I should protect them as well as I should thy sons, O Dhritarashtra!
For requiting, O son, that Brahmana, I have resolved to do this.
Grant us thy permission also, O king!
There, the two heroes, viz., Karna and the son of Pandu, excited with wrath at sight of each other, and both firmly resolved, stood or careered, O king, through their respective divisions.
The son of Radha, however, that bull among men and scorcher of foes, O monarch, in that battle, broke those returned heroes in diverse ways.
By that truth, O Krishna, I shall surely behold thee along with the Pandavas safely come out of the present strife with their foes slain, and the kingdom recovered by them.
O, take me to the east which thou hast first described, and whither, thou hast said, the gods are always present.
When Shalya approached that car, Karna with a cheerful heart addressed his driver, saying, O charioteer, quickly equip the car for me.
Connected with the several constellations, those wives, O king, of Soma of auspicious deeds, served to help men in calculating time.
O king, his shafts were exhausted.
O oppressor of foes, as we have now seen often and often all the agreeable woods and gardens that are in this part of the country, seeing them again would no longer give any pleasure.
And, O son of the Kuru race, O Dhananjaya, thou shalt also slay Karna of fierce prowess, who is even a portion of my father Surya, of energy celebrated throughout the worlds.
Awaked by the noise, O king, many warriors, afflicted still with sleep and fear, and with senses still under a cloud, ran hither and thither.
He that hath the strength of ten thousand elephants and the speed of the wind, he that is mighty and ever wrathful amongst the sons of Pandu, he that always doth good to his brothers and is, therefore, dear to them all, he, O slayer of Madhu, that slew Kichaka with all his relatives, he that is the slayer of the Krodhavasas, of Hidimva, and of Vaka, he that in prowess is equal unto Sakra, and in might unto the Wind-god, he that is terrible, and in wrath is equal unto Madhava himself, he that is the foremost of all smiters,--that wrathful son of Pandu and chastiser of foes, who, restraining his rage, might, impatience, and controlling his soul, is obedient to the commands of his elder brother,--speak to me, O Janardana, tell me how is that smiter of immeasurable valour, that Bhimasena, who in aspect also justifies his name--that Vrikodara possessing arms like maces, that mighty second son of Pandu?
It behoveth thee, O son of Kunti, to slay the Sutas son with every care.
Both the Kurus and the Pandavas, O bull of Bharatas race, beheld the darts hurled from heroic arms course like meteors through the welkin.
The two brave sons of Madri also were defeated by Karna in great battle, though, from some object he had in view, he did not, O sire, slay them then.
Then, on the field of battle, O monarch, warriors careered fearlessly, their limbs bathed in blood and therefore looking like flowering Kinsukas.
This has been an act of great folly on the part of Yudhishthira, O Pandava, since he hath made the result of the battle depend upon the victory or the defeat of only one warrior!
It behoveth thee, O illustrious one, to tell me all this in detail; for I long to hear the story of Rama of great achievements!
And, O Janamejaya, the king of Panchala thinking of Arjuna caused a very stiff bow to be made that was incapable of being bent by any except Arjuna.
Ill-ordered or well-ordered, tell me everything, O Sanjaya.
Warriors, O king, that stood with standards or weapons in their arms, began to tremble, O king, when thy son fell.
The slaughter of a person not engaged in battle, or of a foe, O Bharata who has turned his face from battle or who flies away or seeks protection or joins his hands or yields himself up or is careless, is never applauded by the righteous.
Thus commanded, Visoka said, Of arrows, O hero, thou hast yet 60,000, while thy razor-headed shafts number 10,000, and broad-headed ones number as much.
Bhishma continued,--Even thus, O Bhima, is this wretch of a king--Sisupala of wicked heart, who, proud of the boon granted by Govinda, summons thee to battle!
The sinful Duryodhana of Kurus race will not, O Bharata, accomplish the objects spoken of by Yudhishthira.
The Rakshasa then asked the flaming element Tell me, O Agni, whose wife this woman rightfully is.
O foremost of warriors, although we followed in the track of those warriors, yet, O best of men, we soon lost their footprints and do not know their present residence.
Samvarta said, Listen, O son of Avikshit, excellent as it is the bent of thy mind to perform this act, so too, O king, have I in my mind the ability to perform the sacrifice, I tell thee, O king, that thy good things will become imperishable, and that thou shalt lord it over Sakra and the Celestials with Gandharvas.
O Pandus son, my disgrace had ere this been fated.
Vayu gave him, O best of the Bharatas, two companions, Vala and Ativala, endued with great might and very large mouths.
O righteous lady, thou art conversant with piety.
Sanjaya continued, Strong became that hope, O king, in the heart of thy son, viz., that where Bhishma and Drona had been slain, Karna would vanquish the Pandavas.
And, O king of kings, that slayer of all foes, the virtuous and intelligent son of Madri having arrived at the sea-shore, then despatched with great assurance messengers unto the illustrious Vibhishana, the grandson of Pulastya.
Their foremost of heroes slain, their troops thrown into confusion, themselves mangled with keen arrows, thy sons, after the fall of Karna, O king, fled away in fear.
And, O monarch, wherever they went they recited the speeches that Damayanti had directed them to do.
By good luck, thou hast been victorious, O invincible hero, and by good luck, thy foe hath been slain!
O (prince) of a powerful arm!
Then Vasudeva, O sire, and king Yudhishthira the just, with great effort, succeeded in pacifying those heroes.
Then Nakulas son, with many keen shafts, cut off the struggling Chitrasenas standard, and then his bow, O monarch, in that encounter.
O Sudra, that the fires rejoice not at sight of me?
Once more rallying their own selves as well as one another, all those Kshatriyas, O king, urged by fate, waited (in their encampment).
The deities of Heaven, O ruler of Earth, came to this world for sport.
And O Yajnaseni, what joy will be thine upon beholding in the woods these thy husbands dressed in skins and thread-bare rags, deprived of their wealth and possessions.
All those Kurus, O tiger among men, obtaining thee as their refuge in this battle, stand depending on thee and desirous of thy protection.
And, O great king, the mighty Vaka, the king of the Karushas, capable of fighting by putting forth his powers of illusion, waiteth, upon Jarasandha, as his disciple.
Why, O Partha, dost thou rush towards thy reverend superior for slaying him, without having resolved the exceedingly subtle course of morality that is, again, difficult of being understood?
And he also restored the Sacrifices themselves, O Pandava!
Vaisampayana said, Thus addressed, O king, (by his sister and others), the slayer of Kesin, exceedingly afflicted by grief, answered,--So be it!
And O Bharata, on Bhima being embraced by his brother, his fatigue went off, and all (the powers of body) as also his strength were restored.
After the slaughter of the Sutas son, O king, the Kauravas, terrified and mangled with shafts, masterless and desirous of protection, became like a herd of elephants afflicted by lions.
The high-souled Sandilya, O king, got a beautiful daughter who was chaste, wedded to severe vows, self-restrained, and observant of Brahmacharya.
And thy son also, O monarch, speedily took up Bhurisravas on his car, in that battle, at the very sight of all the bowmen.
Shakra himself, O Dhananjaya, cannot stand before them that rush in fury, having abandoned all hope of life.
Why were all those regions of mine destroyed, O thou of great effulgence?
O Yajnaseni of sweet smiles, tomorrow evening, renouncing sorrow and grief, manage to have a meeting with Kichaka.
Do not, O Partha, be angry for the harsh words I said unto thee.
Even so it is, O king, depending on effects.
And, O king of kings, he was revived with the tree by the power of the Brahmana.
O thou of great wisdom, thou hast also heard in their entirety the words of wisdom spoken by Kunti.
Even these, O slayer of foes, were the words of Vrihaspati, Those enemies that always do wrong by stratagem or force, should be slain by every means.
Indeed, thy grief dispelled, thy ailments conquered, thou wilt be freed from all enmities.’ While, O Kuru king, the chief of the gods was saying so unto Yudhishthira, the deity of Righteousness, in his embodied form, then addressed his own son and said, ‘O king, I am greatly pleased, O thou of great wisdom, with thee, O son, by thy devotion to me, by thy truthfulness of speech, and forgiveness, and self-restraint.
Endued with great activity, the Sutas son, with eyes burning in wrath, then said unto the ruler of the Madras, O Shalya, Karna never aimeth an arrow twice.
Vaisampayana said,--During the course of this gambling, certain to bring about utter ruin (on Yudhishthira), Vidura, that dispeller of all doubts, (addressing Dhritarashtra) said, O great king, O thou of the Bharata race, attend to what I say, although my words may not be agreeable to thee, like medicine to one that is ill and about to breathe his last.
And loud became the uproar, O Bharata, of that mighty army struggling in battle, that resembled the sound of the roaring ocean.
Having heard that thou hadst been afflicted with shafts of Karna, myself and this one came hither, O son of Pandu, for ascertaining thy plight.
Before this, O god, thou hadst even said to us that thou wouldst do us good.
With a broad-headed arrow, O sire, he next cut off the standard of Sahadeva, and with three other arrows, that chastiser of foes afflicted Sahadevas driver.
Thy great strength, O divine Lord, was never known to me before.
And O monarch, when the redoubtable Arjuna had been thus accosted by the noble-hearted Janarddana, he, showing all the honours due to him, sorrowfully replied by merely saying be it so.
O best of snakes, it is fortunate that thy heart hath been set on virtue.
Sanjaya said, During that fearful carnage of men and steeds and elephants, Duhsasana, O king, encountered Dhrishtadyumna.
Fight me, O Vrikodara!
while thou with thy army wert crying distressfully, thou didst witness the prowess of the high-souled Pandavas, and also, O mighty-armed one, of the wicked son of the Suta, Karna.
In view of such circumstances, I shall certainly do, O son of Bhrigu, what I can.
In consequence of the number of the Rishis, O king, the tirthas on the southern banks of the Sarasvati all looked like towns and cities.
Indeed, O monarch, there is nothing I like more than prowess.
Err not, O king.
Beholding Bhimasena of immeasurable energy filled with rage and rushing towards him, thy high-souled son, O bull of Bharatas race, desiring to baffle his blow, set his heart on the manoeuvre called Avasthana.
How could they, O slayer of Madhu, who were roused from their beds by music of cymbals and drums and conchs and flutes, with the honeyed strains of songstresses and the eulogies chanted by bards and professional reciters,--alas, how could they be waked in the deep woods by the yells of wild beasts?
O great Muni, I shall first properly recount the story of this family, as told in the Puranas.
Thy son Duryodhana then, O monarch, with all his troops, rushed against the Pandavas headed by Yudhishthira.
He is, O Madhava, a transgressor of the scriptures, ignorant, and of wicked soul, already overtaken by fate, untractable, and disposed to do evil to those that seek his good.
That king, O child, after performing the Soma sacrifice, gratified the Brahmanas with great presents of rice and wealth.
O lady, let me know thy commands.
The same soldiers that were engaged with each other before the sunrise, once more fought with each other, O Bharata, after, the rise of the sun.
A man, O Kaurava, doth not die so long as his fame lasteth.
O Bharata, reflecting day and night on this, I am unhappy and sleepless, through anxiety for the welfare of the Kurus.
And bearing this Duryodhana said, O king, O ruler of the earth, having seen the Pandava, come speedily back.
O mighty-armed one, thou hast now vanquished even Rishis by the patience and self-control.
Therefore, O ruler of men, listen now to what is beneficial.
47 48 Dhritarashtra said, Tell me, O Sanjaya, how Karna, having caused a great slaughter penetrated into the midst of the Pandava troops, and struck and afflicted king Yudhishthira.
Vyasa continued, The woman thereupon answered, O Sakra, thou mayest know who I am and why, unfortunate that I am, I weep, if only, O chief of the celestials, thou comest with me as I lead the way.
I have not for fourteen long years, O chastiser of foes, beheld the princess of Panchala, that daughter-in-law of mine who herself hath been a prey to constant anxiety on account of her children, whom she hath not seen for that period.
O Kesava, recall to their remembrance all those cruel and harsh words that Dussasana said unto Bhima in the very presence of all the warriors of Kurus race.
Sanjaya said, Listen to me, O Bharata, as I repeat in due order those words, both intimidating and mild, agreeable and consistent with virtue, true and beneficial, and pleasing to the heart, which the slayer of Madhu, of immeasurable soul, said unto Radhas son.
After the completion of that foremost of sacrifices, the Rajasuya (of Varuna), a terrible battle, O Janamejaya, ensued amongst the Kshatriyas.
And, O Vidura, I tell that even this is my resolution.
O we with the regenerate ones at your head, versed in virtue and profit, do you approaching the ascetics separately and inclining them to grace, represent unto them what may be for our supreme good!
Overlooking all these, tell us, O thou of mighty arms, after reflection, and without hesitation, what is for our good.
After they had gone away, the Pandavas, headed by Dhrishtadyumna, advanced, O king, and began to slay their enemies.
And Prahlada said,--Thou art, O illustrious and exalted one, fully conversant with the rules of morality that should guide both the gods and the Asuras and the Brahmanas as well.
I shall practise penances, O puissant one.
And, O Bharata, the mighty hero smilingly strung that bow without the least exertion, and with its twang loud as the thunder-rattle, affrighted all creatures.
For thy sake I shall sustain the river of the gods, when she will take her descent from the sky, she who is pure and blessed and divine, O (king) of a mighty arm!
Even thus, O Madhava, did Vidura of true foresight often speak to me!
In a contest between might and skill, he that is possessed of skill, O king, always prevails!
These also, O Rama, have from fear fled away to the ten points of the compass!
If, O Krishna, Bhima and Arjuna and king Yudhishthira the just are disposed to be virtuous, abandoning virtue I desire an encounter with Duryodhana in battle.
All the quarters around Duryodhanas encampment seem, O Madhava, to be ablaze.
O holy saint!
Terrified by these sounds, the relatives of that Rakshasa came out, O king, with their attendants.
Exceedingly agitated, O monarch, in consequence of the blow, Sahadeva sat down on the terrace of his car.
O sire, this force consisting of all the kings of the earth is, indeed, at thy elbow.
Vaisampayana said, Recollecting the words spoken by Vasudeva, Yudhishthira once more addressed that scion of Vrishnis race, saying, How, O Kesava, could wicked Duryodhana say it?
And, O Maghavat, peace attendeth also O exalted one, the kings of the whole world.
Do thou, O king, cause the obsequial rites of thy sons and grandsons and sires to be performed according to due order!’ 10 Vaishampayana said, Hearing these words of Vidura, that bull of Bharata’s race (Dhritarashtra) ordered his car to be yoked.
After Yudhishthira, the son of Dharma, had gone away, the high-souled son of Drona also, O king, left that spot.
And, O king, the Pandavas are as much near to me as they are to prince Duryodhana or to all the other Kurus.
Therefore, O best of Brahmanas, this that you have said ought to be true.
At that juncture the beat of cymbals and drums and leonine shouts, and grunts of elephants with the sounds of diverse musical instruments, arose there, O king, among the (Kaurava) troops, O bull among men.
Horsemen encountering horsemen in that battle, and car-warriors encountering car-warriors, and foot-soldiers encountering foot-soldiers, and foot-soldiers meeting with horsemen, and foot-soldiers meeting with cars and elephants, and cars meeting with elephants and horsemen, and elephants of great speed meeting with the three other kinds of forces, began, O king, to crush and grind one another.
Vaishampayana said, The question thou askest me, O king, is, indeed, worthy of thee!
Fear not, O tiger among kings!
And those were Virata with his son, and Dhrishtadyumna of Prishatas race, and Bhima, the five Kekaya brothers, and Satyaki also, O king.
O lord, in the name of that friendship I ask thee, Do thou without hesitation tell me the truth, and that which is good for me now.
And, O king, assembling his pupils one day together, the preceptor Drona asked of them the fee, saying, Seize Drupada, the king of Panchala in battle and bring him unto me.
Do thou, O chieftain of Kurus race, accompany me to-day to the presence of the king, the great aggrandiser of the Kuru race, and sound him of my intended return to Dwaraka.
And, O king, a person of immature understanding will never act as one of mature years.
Knowing, therefore, Duryodhanas heart and what my most cherished wishes are, why then dost thou, O Arjuna, entertain such apprehensions in respect of myself like one unacquainted with everything?
Of the heroes that have escaped, the number is 240,165.’ Dhritarashtra said, ‘Tell me, O mighty-armed one, for thou art conversant with everything, what ends have those foremost of men attained.’ Dhritarashtra said, ‘By the power of what knowledge, O son, thou seest these things like one crowned with ascetic success?
O Radheya, they are mighty warriors and naturally able, they are now devoted to ascetic austerities.
O accomplished one whatever gems there are on earth possessed of superior virtues, obtain them, O lucky one, and be thou happy for a full hundred years!
because his understanding was afflicted by destiny itself, it is for this that he did not, stupefied by the illusion of the gods, hurl that fatal dart of Vasava, though he had it in his hand, at Devakis son, Krishna for his destruction or at Partha endued with prowess like Indras, O lord!
O elder brother of Pandu, the sons of Pandu were incapable of defeating in battle the great bowman Bhishma who resembled the Destroyer himself armed with the lance.
Sudhanwan said, Since, O Prahlada, thou hast preferred virtue and hast not, from temptation, said an untruth, I grant thy son his life that is dear to thee.
And, O chief of kings, that same ruler of men, betook himself to the mountain Kailasa, accompanied by both his wives, and with the desire of having a son became engaged in the practice of exceeding austere penances.
The swan spoke, Thou, O crow, wilt doubtless fly the hundred and one different kinds of flight.
Proceed thither, O Krishna, for I will slay them!
Do not give way to wrath, O slayer of Pralamva!
Thy son, O king, who had constantlybeen implored (for peace) but who always wished to terminate his hostility (with the Pandavas by slaughtering them) has caused the earth to be exterminated.
Then Arjuna, O monarch, speedily proceeded towards Bhishma, placing Sikhandin ahead.
O chastiser of foes, this infant seeks to gratify thee by bending his head.
The words that Bhima spoke in the midst of the assembly have all been nearly accomplished by him, O monarch.
That army, O chief of the Bharatas, as it came to battle, was in a moment exterminated by those high-souled warriors, for it failed to obtain a protector.
At present, however, O monarch, king Jarasandha, overcoming that prosperity enjoyed by their whole order, and overpowering them by his energy hath set himself over the heads of all these kings.
All those regions of blessedness, O thou of beautiful face, that belong to the gods can be obtained by penances.
And, O king, neither doth senility nor hunger, nor thirst, nor death, nor fear afflict any one at that place.
And O the best of men, the virtuous king Yudhishthira now enjoys the sovereignty of the earth without a rival, by the might of Bhimasena and the twin brothers.
I ask thee, O Vidura, this question,--what are those families that are called high?
And, O beautiful lady, residing here thou wilt regain thy (lost) lord.
If king Yudhishthira the just, or Bhimasena, or thyself, O lotus-eyed one, had, on that occasion, said, Let the blade of grass (inspired by Aswatthaman into a Brahma-weapon) destroy the unconscious mother--O puissant one, then I would have been destroyed and this (sad occurrence) Vaisampayana said, When the Brahma-weapon was withdrawn by Krishna, at that time, the laying-in room was illumined by thy father with his energy.
O chief of men, to-day in very way thou art welcome to this place.
O, blest be thou!
And, O Brahmanas, having come thereto, they were all slain on the spot.
As on that occasion the Grandsire had been selected with care by all the celestials, indeed, O great king, as one greater than Sankara, so thou that art superior to Karna art now selected by us with care.
O Shalya, Karna wishes to contend in battle today with Arjuna.
The gods then, having heard those words, repaired to Daksha and said, Be gratified, O adorable one, with Soma!
The diverse gods--Indra and Vishnu, both of great energy, and Surya and Candramas, and Dhatri, and Vidhatri, and Vayu, and Agni, and Pushan, and Bhaga, and Aryaman, and Ansa, and Vivaswat, and Rudra of great intelligence, and Mitra, and the (eleven) Rudras, the (eight) Vasus, the (twelve) Adityas, the (twin) Ashvinis, the Viswedevas, the Maruts, the Saddhyas, the Pitris, the Gandharvas, the Apsaras, the Yakshas, the Rakshasas, the Pannagas, innumerable celestial Rishis, the Vaikhanasas, the Valakhilyas, those others (among Rishis) that subsist only on air and those that subsist on the rays of the Sun, the descendants of Bhrigu and Angiras, many high-souled Yatis, all the Vidyadharas, all those that were crowned with ascetic success, the Grandsire, Pulastya, Pulaha of great ascetic merits, Angiras, Kasyapa, Atri, Marichi, Bhrigu, Kratu, Hara, Prachetas, Manu, Daksha, the Seasons, the Planets, and all the luminaries; O monarch, all the rivers in their embodied forms, the eternal Vedas, the Seas, the diverse tirthas, the Earth, the Sky, the Cardinal and Subsidiary points of the compass, and all the Trees, O king, Aditi the mother of the gods, Hri, Sri, Swaha, Sarasvati, Uma, Sachi, Sinivali, Anumati, Kuhu, the Day of the new moon, the Day of the full Moon, the wives of the denizens of heaven, Himavat, Vindhya, Meru of many summits, Airavat with all his followers, the Divisions of time called Kala, Kashtha, Fortnight, the Seasons, Night, and Day, O king, the prince of steeds, Ucchaisravas, Vasuki the king of the Snakes, Aruna, Garuda, the Trees, the deciduous herbs, and the adorable god Dharma--all came there together.
Vaisampayana continued, Then Vidura, O Bharata, saying, So be it, in consultation with Bhishma, fixed upon a sacred spot for the funeral rites of Pandu.
Indeed, O king, the several volumes of this treatise should be worshipped by one with devotion and concentrated mind.
What is this that thou art about, inasmuch as, O thou of inconceivable prowess, thou graspest that sword in anger?
An innocent girl that I am and attached to thee, accept me, O lord of the Salwas!
He then, O king, cut off Namuchis head, using the foam of water (as his weapon).
Then Duryodhana challenged all the Pandavas to battle, O chief of Bharatas race, like the Asura Vali in days of yore challenging the gods.
Krishna said, Those words of grave import, which, O bull of the Bharata race, it behoveth thee to utter on an occasion like this, have, indeed, been uttered by thee.
O king, O giver of honours, proceed towards thy camp!
Bhimasena said, Where wilt thou go, O king of kings, having cast off thy coat of mail and weapons, towards the warriors of the foe cased in mail, and leaving thy brothers, O ruler of earth?
Then Sanjaya, O king, began to comfort those ladies stricken with grief, bathed in tears, and reft of consciousness.
Behold thy old father and mother, O king, plunged in misery.
How also couldst thou, O child, encounter Drona, that foremost of all wielders of weapons, that preceptor of the Vrishnis and Kauravas, twice-born one who may be regarded as the preceptor of all the Kshatriyas?
There was not, O king, a single great car-warrior among the Somakas, who, having approached Bhishma in that battle, returned with life from that engagement.
Arjuna said, Do thou not, O king, address these upbraidings to me, thou that art passing thy time full two miles away from battle.
At the cries of that hero while he was being slain, his wives and guards that were in his tent all awake, O king!
Beholding this princess, this mother of Lakshmana, O thou of mighty arms, my heart is torn with grief.
And knowing that Pandus sons were intent upon asking (him), Lomasa versed in speech said, Hear, O sons of Pandu!
In this way, O ruler of men, king Yudhishthira the just, praised Janardana greatly as also Arjuna, O monarch!
There is no need of battle, O king of kings.
At this Ashtavakra said, We have come, O ruler of men, to witness thy sacrificial ceremony and our curiosity, O king, is very great.
Indeed, along the track of the angry Parthas car, O monarch, the ground, miry with blood, became impassable, O chief of the Bharatas, like the sporting ground of Rudra.
Return, O thou of the fairest complexion: I bend my head unto thee, and prostrate myself at thy feet.
And, O descendant of the Vrishni race, while thou wert away, where didst thou dwell?
Dronas son, however, O Bharata, yielding to the influence of wrath and reverence, could not sleep, but continued to breathe like a snake.
Hear, O king, this which is a mystery of the gods, O chief of Bharata’s race.
The powerful Ananta, directed thereto both by Brahman and Narayana, O Brahmana, tore up the mountain with the woods thereon and with the denizens of those woods.
Without doubt, O Sanjaya, my heart is made of adamant, since it breaks not into a 1,000 fragments even after hearing of the slaughter of my hundred sons!
Approaching the king, the mighty-armed hero said, I shall, O king, engage in battle today the illustrious son of Pandu.
Meanwhile those two heroes, O monarch, both armed with maces and both unbearable by foes, stood there, goading each other with fierce speeches.
He hath even said, O, fie on the strength of the king of the beasts!
Taking him with me, O chief of men, I have come to thee, desirous of the safety of all the warriors.
Well-trained horsemen, O king, surrounding great car-warriors, careered on the field, striking and slaying the latter with spears and darts and swords.
These and many other foremost of heroes, O king, all inspired with desire of victory that great bowman, viz., the son of Karna, O monarch, continued to afflict with his shafts.
What office wilt thou, O Vrikodara, fill in the city of Virata?
The heroic and valiant Sahadeva then, O monarch, cut off, with a broad-headed arrow, the head of Uluka as the latter advanced against him.
I tell thee truly, O illustrious lady, that if I am cast off by that hero or by thee either, I will no longer bear this life of mine.
Sahadeva, however, O king, cut off every one of those numerous arrows as they coursed with great impetuosity towards him, with five shafts of his.
Destroy the might of Dhritarashtras sons, O son of Pritha, with my and Arjunas aid.
Maitreya said, I shall not speak again unto thee, O king, for my words are not regarded by thy son.
Tell me all this, O Brahmana, if thou thinkest that I may listen to it without impropriety!
Then, O king, with those blazing shafts sped by the warriors, that were equipped with wings of gold and that looked like snakes just freed from their sloughs, the points of the compass seemed to be ablaze.
But why is it, O Sakuni, that thou askest me of my wealth?
Gratified, the great god threw his wrath into the water, O king, that wrath, assuming the form of fire, is always employed in consuming that liquid element.
O monarch, the kings of the east, the south, the west, and the north, have all been made tributory to thee!
Then Vasudeva, O monarch, said unto that king, I know Artayani, O Bharata, truly.
I shall fight with thee, O regenerate one, on the field of Kurukshetra!
Hearing those words, Karna said, Karna, O snake, never desires to have victory in battle today by relying on anothers might.
Having heard then, O best of Bharatas race, those words of Duryodhana, Yudhishthira, that bull of the Bharata race, with eyes exceedingly red in anger and himself sighing like a snake of virulent poison, licking the corners of his mouth with his tongue, as if swelling with wrath, and casting his eyes on Janardana and his own brothers, said unto Uluka these words that were fraught with both mildness and Krishna said, My words also, O gamblers son, should be communicated unto Suyodhana.
Then, O best of the Bharatas, well-pleased, her father-in-law and mother-in-law said these words unto the princess seated in a corner, Thou hast completed the vow as prescribed.
O Karna, save in battle all my warriors.
Do thou command me (what I am to do), O subduer of foes, having been thus addressed by Dhritarashtras intelligent son, Karna ordered all the necessaries for the excursion.
Even thus that damsel of high vows, O tiger among kings, began to boil those jujubes.
Know, O Madhava, that Gandharis wrath, O mighty-armed one, hath been provoked!
Vaisampayana said, Upon the retirement of the chief of the Kurus into the forest, the Pandavas, O king, afflicted besides by grief on account of their mother, became very cheerless.
Cherish them now as becomes thee, O bull of Bharatas race, as if they were thy own sons.
Sanjaya said, When the troops, O bull of Bharatas race, were withdrawn on the first day, and when Duryodhana was filled with delight upon (beholding) Bhishma excited with wrath in battle, king Yudhisthira the just, speedily repaired unto Janardana, accompanied by all his brothers and all the kings (on his side).
Even such and so wonderful, O Bharata, was that battle between him and them.
O Partha, I have narrated to you the signs and indications of Dharma.
But neither on the earth, nor in the Dhritarashtra said, I ask thee, O Sanjaya, in the presence of my boy and of these kings, what words were said by the illustrious Dhananjaya of might that knoweth no diminution,--that leader of warriors,--that destroyer of the lives of the wicked?
Damayanti then said, If thou dost not, O mighty king, intend to forsake me, why then dost thou point out to me the way to the country of the Vidarbhas?
And, O bull of Bharatas race, Duryodhana, then, summoning his counsellor, Purochana in private, took hold of his right hand and said, O Purochana, this world, so full of wealth, is mine.
All this, O auspicious lady, I remember.
The beautiful Arundhati said unto him, Our store of food hath been exhausted, O Brahmana!
Hearing these words, the adorable Daksha, O king, became angry and in consequence thereof hurled the curse of phthisis upon Soma.
Go then, O child, in safety to accomplish thy purpose.
Having recourse to that path, Kshatriyas, O bull of the Kshatriya order, engage in battle.
Behold him, O Karna, in this battle.
Regaining energy there, O king, he now illuminates the universe.
War and peace, O thou of mighty arms, are within thy control.
This, O tiger among men, is beneficial to all.
O Sankara, I seek thy protection.
O lord of men, Yudhishthira, as courtier made himself agreeable to Virata and his sons as also to all the Matsyas.
At the time of the gambling, O Dhananjaya, Bhima vowed to break the thighs of Suyodhana with his mace in battle.
O foremost of those acquainted with Brahma, it was the settled conviction of the kings that Dhananjaya would never, with life, succeed in transgressing Drona.
Having fought a wonderful battle, by good luck, O sinless one, thou hast quaffed the blood of Duhshasana, like a lion quaffing the blood of a buffalo!
Having said this much, the king, with eyes laved with tears, became silent, O monarch, agitated as he was with agony.
But if thou likest, O king, I will play.
O thou of beautiful hips, tell us now what is true or false in this, O beautiful lady!
Then Yudhishthira, O king, avoiding the son of Drona in that great battle proceeded against thy army, resolved to achieve the cruel task of slaughter.
And all of them praised the royal Shalya, that ornament of battle, saying, Victory to thee, O king.
O giver of honours, let the universe, through thy grace, obtain happiness.
Hearing this, Kunti said, O slayer of foes, a certain Brahamana gave me this formula of invocation as a boon, and, O lord, I have summoned thee only to test its efficacy.
Maya said,--O bull amongst men, what thou hast said is worthy of thee, O exalted one.
Know, O Sakra, that highly incensed Samvarta, used to ascetic practices, told me these words in a rage.
I have, O sinless one, also no complaint that though by birth I am superior to Kunti yet I am inferior to her in station.
6 Vaishampayana said, Hear, O king, what the procedure is, and what the fruits, O Bharata, are that will spring from one’s listening (to a recitation of the Bharata).
O Govinda, I desire to hear, O lord, all those words again.
Thus occurred the battle between thy troops and the foe on that afternoon, O monarch, every one of the combatants being inspired with the desire of victory.
Accept those words, O monarch.
And, O king, the sons of Aditi are twelve with Indra heading them all.
Go, fight, O son of Kunti!
The island-born (Vyasa) also, of virtuous soul, O Bharata, having bathed in that tirtha, obtained great Yoga powers and attained to high success.
As thou, O hero, intendest to subdue all our enemies, repair thou.
Yudhishthira said, In human society, O mighty and highly intelligent The serpent replied, O scion of the Bharatas race, my belief is that the man who bestows alms on proper objects, speaks kind words and tells the truth and abstains from doing injury to any creature goes to heaven.
On the other hand, O slayer of Madhu, the wealth that was won from the Pandavas then, was ordered by me, to be returned unto them.
Unto her, however, O king, the lord of the Salwas said with a laughter, O thou of the fairest complexion, I no longer desire to make a wife of thee who wast to be wedded to another.
The gods answered him, saying, He whom thou wilt appoint, will, O Lord of the gods, without doubt, become thy driver!
He then ceased, O king, to make further efforts, saying, he had not the power which he had before.
Beholding that great bowman thus proceeding, all creatures, O Bharata, regarded Karna as already slain by the high-souled Pandava.
O Vrikodara, to-day I have been freed from a terrible curse.
By this act, O father, extinguish the grief that consumeth me like a blazing fire, that robbeth me of sleep, and that pierces my heart even like a terrible dart.
At the command of the chief of the deities, we are ready to do what is agreeable to thee.’ Vaishampayana continued: Having said so, the gods then ordered the celestial messenger, O scorcher of foes, saying, ‘Do thou show unto Yudhishthira his friends and kinsmen.’ Then the royal son of Kunti and the celestial messenger proceeded together, O foremost of kings, to that place where those chiefs of men (whom Yudhishthira had wished to see) were.
Adopt this censurable behaviour, O perpetuator of Kurus race!
And terrific was the battle that suddenly took place between Bhima and his foes, resembling the battle, O great king, between Indra and the mighty host of Ditis sons.
Tell us what the cause is for which Krishna has fallen down on the Earth!’ Yudhishthira said: ‘O best of men, though we were all equal unto her she had great partiality for Dhananjaya.
O descendant of Bharata, do thou treat on the foot-prints of ancient saintly kings.
Dhritarashtra said, Beholding the grandson of Sini proceeding towards Arjuna, grinding as he went that large force, what, indeed, O Sanjaya, did those shameless sons of mine do?
Those words of the sages, O Janardana, are now being realised, since the Kshatriyas are undergoing almost entire extermination in consequence of Duryodhanas acts!
Bhima and Arjuna and the twins, and Draupadi also of great fame, similarly clad themselves in bark of trees, O king.
As a snake, for its own destruction, challenges that foremost of birds, viz., Vinatas son, possessed of beautiful plumage and great activity, even so dost thou, O Karna, challenge Dhananjaya the son of Pandu.
The establishment of peace, O king, depends on thee and myself, O monarch.
O mother, a position in which death is uncertain is better than that in which it is certain.
Sanjaya said, Listen, O king, quietly to this terrific battle.
At last, O king, Duhshasanas son slew him on the field.
It is for this that I have drawn the sword, O delighter of the Yadus.
When thou that art a brave brother of Suyodhana, are intent on flight, without doubt, O hero, thou shouldst Sanjaya said, Meanwhile, O king, Duhsasana rushed against the grandson of Sini, scattering thousands of shafts like a mighty cloud pouring torrents of rain.
Yudhishthira said, Pray for my victory, O regenerate one, and counsel what is for my good.
Listen now, O son of Virochana, to the demerits of those that are never forgiving!
Thou art, O fire, the supreme energy born of thy own power.
Or, tell us, O hero, about (the nature of) that courage in consequence of which thou hast fled from battle!
Then, O monarch, a battle took place between the Pandavas and the returned Kurus who made death itself their goal.
O king, I shall speedily come back, O ruler of men.
And when I am dead, O king, thou wilt become happy with Vidura.
These five highly blessed Gandharvas endued with the effulgence of fire, and possessed of great energy, were, O king, the sons of Draupadi and yourself.
It behoveth Dhritarashtras son, therefore, O Vidura, with his counsellors, to accept my good and beneficial counsels that are consistent with virtue and profit and competent to dispel the present calamity.
Arrived at that foremost of tirthas, Baladeva, O king, duly made presents unto the high-souled Brahmanas.
Indeed, O tiger among men, that weapon which the Lord of all creatures useth at the end of Yuga for destroying created things, existeth with me.
For then, if the Pandavas, from association, feel an attachment for Duryodhana, then, O king of men, good fortune may be thine.
Vaishampayana said, Daksha had seven and twenty daughters, O king!
And all the citizens came out and lined the streets and bent their heads down to the ground singing eulogies in his honour, O king, when Hrishikesa entered the city and passed through it.
Supported by many thousands of elephants and cars, and by hundred thousands of cavalry and infantry, and stretching his bow in great wrath he advanced against that division of the Madras and the Kekayas, O chastiser of foes, leading his troops with him.
In this foremost of tirthas of the Sarasvati, O king, he began to emaciate his own body by means of vows and fasts with fixed resolve.
I shall, O prince, relate everything unto thee on the morrow.
O beauteous girl, thy mother and I are both daughters of the high-souled Sudaman, the ruler of the Dasarnas.
And he said, What use, O lotus-eyed one, in telling thee of the joy I feel at this advent of thine, for thou art the inner Soul of all embodied creatures.
Indeed, even as creatures, O sire, endued with actions, from fear of death, take the shelter of virtue, thy sons, O ruler of men, from fear of the high-souled son of Pandu, took shelter with the mighty bowman Karna.
And the battle, O sire, that took place between him and them was fierce in the extreme.
Thou never didst attend, O Bhima, to the wants of others while eating.
Hearing these words from the preceptors son, O king, at that time, built great hopes on Karna.
Those women, O chief of the Bharatas race, who were very delicate, now proceeded with speed towards the city, having lost their near ones and kinsmen.
All this, know, O king, was due to the curse denounced by Brahmanas.
O thou of unblamable life, I shall not abandon thee, virtuous as thou art and of a truthful disposition!
The incensed Dhritarashtra told me, O Bharata, go thou thither where thou likest Never more shall I seek thy aid in ruling the earth or my capital,--O best of monarchs, forsaken by king Dhritarashtra, I come to thee for tendering good counsel.
Filled then with rage and breathing, O king, like a snake of virulent poison, Dronas son pierced Satyaki in return with five and twenty arrows whetted on stone.
Here an encounter was beautiful, there another was awful, and there another was exceedingly fierce, O lord!
The Brahmana continued, Thus addressed by me, that intelligent disciple, O slayer of Madhu, once more asked me about this religion of Emancipation that is so difficult to explain.
Then Rama, O Kaurava, filled with rage, covered me with hundreds and thousands and hundreds of thousands and hundreds of millions arrows!
And if, O Bharata, it be true that no creature is ever destroyed, then one doth not make oneself guilty of the death of a creature by piercing (destroying) its body.
My curiosity is irrepressible, O foremost of all persons acquainted with Brahma!
I am puzzled as regards this; O sire, enlighten me who ask thee this!
Through the grace, O Partha, of that god of gods, that deity armed with a trident, slay Karna, O mighty-armed one, like Indra slaying the Asura Namuci.
Kanka said in reply, O monarch, O bestower of honours, what business hast thou with gamble which is attended with numerous evils?
Arjuna said, What is the state, O Krishna, of those who abandoning the ordinance of the scriptures, perform sacrifices endued with faith?
While engaged in slaying his foes by means of superior weapons, the valiant son of Subhadra, endued with mighty energy, seemed, O Bharata, to be present everywhere.
If, O Bharata, thou art willing, thou mayest be able to allay that danger even yet, for, O bull of Bharatas race, peace, I think, is not difficult of acquisition.
If thou likest none here, come, we will go hence, O Matali.
O thou of excellent vows, I shall serve thee according to the measure of my might!
Kesava is, of course, not unworthy of our worship, but both time and place are against it, for he (Krishna), O king, on receiving our worship, will very likely think that we are worshipping him out of fear.
Markandeya continued, On one occasion, O Bharata, when that king, the lord of the Madras, was seated with Narada in the midst of his court, engaged in conversation, Savitri, accompanied by the kings counsellors, came to her fathers abode after having visited various sacred regions and asylums.
And the combatants, O king, cutting one another, made the whole field resemble a crematorium strewn with flesh and blood.
And, O monarch, the royal son of Bhangasura, having obtained the mysteries of equestrian science and having given unto the ruler of the Naishadhas the mysteries of dice, went to his own city, employing another person for his charioteer.
It cannot, again, O foremost of victors, be any fault of ours that the invincible Pandavas, were defeated once again at dice and had to go to the Woods.
And, O Bhishma, if thy mind is always inclined to sing the praises of others, why dost thou not praise Salya and other rulers of the earth?
As regards thee, O thou of red eyes, fly thou in any kind of course that thou likest.
Giving up this hypocrisy, O king, adopt the practices of a Kshatriya and do all that one should do as such.
Beholding even diverse heroic and mighty kings, each owning extensive territories, slain in battle, the carnage, O Krishna, did not still cease!
Thus addressed by his maternal uncle, Dronas son, that foremost of all wielders of weapons, quickly repaired unto Duryodhana and addressing him, said these words, When I am alive, O son of Gandhari, it behoveth thee not to engage thyself in battle, disregarding me, O descendant of Kuru, that am ever desirous of thy good.
Hearing the twang of his bow and the slap of his palms, both resembling the roll of the thunder, the troops, O king, trembled all over the field.
O Brahmana, what I am to do for thee.
Thus deserted by his two brothers, who were moved by the temptation of appropriating those animals, the great ascetic Trita, O king, while within that lonely well covered with dust and herbs and creepers, thought himself plunged, O chief of the Bharatas, into hell itself like a sinful wretch.
All sacred Speeches and all the Sciences stood around it, and all hymns, O monarch, and the Vedic sound of Vashat also.
28 Sanjaya said, During the progress of that battle which was so destructive of men and steeds and elephants, Subalas son, Shakuni, O king, rushed against Sahadeva.
When I heard that Jarasandha, the foremost of the royal line of Magadha, and blazing in the midst of the Kshatriyas, had been slain by Bhima with his bare arms alone, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success.
Beholding the son of Subala careering fearlessly in battle, a loud uproar, O king, arose among the Pandavas in that part of the army.
Yudhishthira said, Alas, for this, O thou of mighty arms, tell (us) the means of thy death.
O bearer of offerings, having created the three worlds, thou when the hour cometh, consumeth them in thy unkindled form.
Beholding his troops shrouded with arrows, O monarch, in that battle, king Yudhishthira the just began to reflect in this strain, Verily, how shall those grave words of Madhava become true?
Like the sacrifice of Maya, of king Sasavindu, or of king Vaisravana, is this sacrifice of thine, O foremost one of Bharatas race, O Janamejaya said, Though this one is but a boy, he speaks yet like a wise old man.
This Puloma was, indeed, first chosen by thee, O Rakshasa, but she was not taken by thee with holy rites and invocations.
Or if that sinful one beholdeth us emerge, after the expiry of the pledged period of non-discovery, he will again invite thee, O great king, to dice, and the play will once more begin.
And, O Kaurava, after they had all gone, the Pandavas began to dwell pleasantly in the same forest, together with Krishna.
And in that combat he felled heads, by hundreds, of heroic warriors, O king, and elephants cased in thorny mail, like summits of mountains (felled) by heavens bolt.
O amiable Yudhishthira, do thou ask for another boon that thou mayst like!
Slaying them soon, O bull of Bharatas race, Arjuna looked resplendent like a fire consuming a forest on the expiry of winter.
Therefore, O Madri, prevent me not from achieving that which must be achieved.
Then, O, great prince, Atri said to Gautama, As Indra, the lord of all creatures, ruleth over our destinies, so doth this king!
It is impossible for me, O Dhananjaya, to repeat, in detail, all that I said on that occasion.
And that destroyer of foes then went up to the king and accosted him, saying, Victory to thee, O king, and blest be ye.
On every recurring day of the new moon, O monarch, the god having the hare for his mark bathes in the excellent tirtha of Prabhasa and regains his form and beauty.
Agni became the staff, and Soma became the head, and Vishnu the point, O king, of that foremost of arrows.
O mighty-armed one, check them as also the Kailkeyas, O best of men, else, protected by the diadem-decked (Arjuna), they will annihilate us all.
O best of kings, thy duty is to chastise all who act cruelly, who are engaged in sinful practices and who have thrown to the winds religion, profit, and pleasure as explained in the scriptures.
The ruler of the Madras, with stupefied heart, quickly proceeding, O king, to the side of Duryodhana, on that car divested of standard said in sorrow these words, The elephants, the steeds, and the foremost of car-warriors of thy army have been slain.
Sakra said, O Jataveda, it is thou who dost burn all other things and there is none else who can reduce thee to ashes.
It behoveth thee, O queen, to return to the city, accompanied by these thy daughters-in-law.
Therefore, O Dhritarashtra, do thou according to my direction repair to king Marutta attended by Samvarta, and deliver this message to him--Do thou, O prince, accept Vrihaspati as thy spiritual preceptor, as otherwise, I shall strike thee with my terrific thunderbolt.
Assuring him duly, the valiant king of the Madras, having formed, O monarch, a grand array whose arrangements were auspicious in every respect, proceeded against the Parthas in battle.
O Duryodhana, strive to maintain thy good name.
Thy desire he will fulfill, the desire, namely, to be of service to thy fathers, O king!
Vaisampayana said,--defeated at dice, after the Pandavas had gone to the woods, Dhritarashtra, O king, was overcome with anxiety.
Yudhishthira said,--O son of Suvala, I know that I have untold wealth.
O foremost of men, I have not yet been satisfied by granting boons to thee!
Therefore, O Vahuka, stay thou with me.
Vaisampayana said, While, O great king, Duryodhana was entering (the city), the panegyrists eulogized the prince of unfailing prowess.
For not having taken my food, O child of Kurus race, I am so weak as to be unable to move.
Men of intelligence, acting with deliberation, always obtain good fruits; it behoveth thee, therefore, O king, to exert thyself.
Do not, O son of Kunti, roar fruitlessly in this way like autumnal clouds uncharged with water!
He hath great faith in Bhishma, and Drona, and Kripa, and Karna, and Dronas son, and Jayadratha, and, therefore, he never setteth his heart on peace, O Janardana.
It is in this region, O foremost of Brahmanas, that those illustrious and truth-speaking Munis called by the name of Dharma, guard the source of the Ganges.
Then the mighty Bhimasena of great intelligence once more cheerfully said unto his charioteer, Ascertain, O Suta, whether those assembled cars and standards that are advancing towards me, are ours or the enemys.
Sanjaya said, The troops of both the armies, having proceeded to their tents, duly took up their quarters, O king, according to the divisions and the sub-divisions to which they belonged.
Thou art skilled, O Sanjaya, in narration.
Verily, O puissant one, this sacrificial steed of king Yudhishthira the just, should be followed by thee.
It is for this that thou livest, O Madraka.
Dhritarashtra said, O holy one, it is even so as thou, O Narada, sayest.
And upon Bhimasena, O great king, the mighty Sakradeva showered arrowy downpours like the clouds after summer is gone.
As Yudhishthira the high-souled king of the Kurus always commands my love and respect, I have, O son of Pritha, placed this my body and all the wealth that I have in my house, at his disposal.
Dussala of the Kurus, Dhananjaya, deeply pierced therewith by his son, then fell down in a swoon on the Earth, O king.
I also, ascending my car, and praised by the Brahmanas, entered our city and represented, everything unto my mother Satyavati, everything that had transpired, and she, O great king, uttered benedictions on me.
Do thou hear what he said, O thou of great intelligence.
And after Ravana had taken his seat, and rested himself a while, Maricha skilled in speech, sat beside Ravana and addressed him who was himself as eloquent in speech, saying, Thy complexion hath assumed an unnatural hue; is it all right with thy kingdom, O king of the Rakshasas?
O sinless one, it is for this virtue of thine which thou hast acquired from regard to thy ancestors, that I have been gratified with thee and thou hast, O son, obtained a sight of my person.
Thou askest me repeatedly, O king, about the Pandavas for knowing their strength and weakness.
O thou that art devoted to truth, the promise thou hast given in the presence of these chiefs for the benefit of Satyavati, hath, indeed, been worthy of thee.
O thou of Vrishnis race, O slayer of Madhu, I seek to gratify thee by bending my head, O hero, unto thee.
Thou art seen, O Naishadha, Hiding thyself behind those shrubs, why dost thou not reply unto me?
Meru, O Bharata, gave him two companions named Kanchana and Meghamalin.
Arjuna said, This Satyajit, O king, will today become thy protector in battle.
Behold, O Arjuna, Karna is trying to rally the flying Kauravas.
The Sun also hath set, O father!
O Yuyutsu, both Vasudeva and we all say to thee--I accept thee, O thou of mighty arms, fight for my cause.
Bring thou hither, O Ajamida, thy father Vyasa of high vows and thy queen Gandhari.
Thus addressed by thy son, O sire, the son of Radha replied unto Duryodhana, that foremost one among the Kurus, in these words, Deeply hath my body been pierced in battle by the brave bowman Bhimasena, capable of striking vigorously with repeated showers of arrows.
By good luck, victory hath become thine, O king of kings.
What is this, O bull among men?
His respected wife, beholding him relying on the god and paying his adorations to them, than addressed him, O king, and said, Homage to the gods is productive of benefits!
She obtains the fruit of that conduct today, O best of men.’ Vaishampayana continued: Having said this, that foremost one of Bharata’s race proceeded on.
Dhritarashtra said,--There (on the field of battle) O Sanjaya, the warriors of which side first advanced to battle cheerfully?
And those mighty warriors, O Bharata, then began to case themselves in impenetrable mail that were besides variegated with pure gold, and armed themselves with celestial weapons of various kinds.
Seeing this, the Rishi became ashamed, O monarch, and fell at the feet of the god.
This, O king, is the rule with us; to ever enjoy equally a jewel that we may obtain.
And, O lord of men, in thy presence he ever crieth me down.
For thy sake, O sire, I would willingly follow the footsteps of my (slain) brothers and the other heroic kings of the Earth.
Lomasa said, Listen, O king, to the history of Rama (the son of Dasaratha) and Rama of Bhrigus line gifted with intelligence.
Then that delighter of the Yadavas, beholding the Pandava army breaking, reined the excellent car (that he guided), and addressing Vibhatsu the son of Pritha, said,--That hour is come, O Partha, which thou hadst hoped for.
As soon as the king fell down, Vidura also, of great fame, O monarch, afflicted with sorrow on account of the kings distress, fell down on the earth.
O slayer of foes, the charioteers reached Dwaravati without the sons of Pritha among them.
Examining all the quivers containing my arrows, tell me, O Suta, ascertaining the matter well, what quantity of arrows is still left on my car, that is, how much of what sort.
Today, O king, I shall, in battle, quell all thy pride!
Addressed in these beneficial words by his maternal uncle, the son of Drona, with eyes red in rage, answered his uncle, O king, saying, ‘Where can a person that is afflicted, or one that is under the influence of rage, or one whose heart is always engaged in revolving projects for the acquisition of wealth, or one that is under the power of lust, obtain sleep?
Vaisampayana continued, Then the illustrious Vyasa, addressing Yudhishthira the just, said, This day is an auspicious day, O son of Pandu!
Then Vasudeva, bowing down, said unto him, O king, the celebrated vow of the wielder of Gandiva who is ever devoted to truth about his Gandiva, is known to thee.
The gold-decked arrows, O king, shot by them, speedily filled the terrace of Arjunas car.
O, protect us as the learned Vidura ever protecteth us.
Listening to the Bharata, O king, when recited, O thou of Bharata’s race, by a reader of this kind, the listener, observant of vows all the while and cleansed by purificatory rites, acquires valuable fruits.
Friendless as I am, I have no desire, O lord, for even life!
Thus addressed by Partha, Kesava replied unto him, I am, also O Partha, of the opinion which thou hast expressed.
Loud leonine shouts arose as the two hosts encountered each other, O monarch, making death their goal.
O, answer me truly, for this, indeed, is the rule followed by the honest.
Seeing the Satwata hero, O king, standing in battle like a hill pierced with arrows (by the foes), the Kuru heroes, who had fled away, rallied and came back.
And when that lord of all the Rakshasas is seated on the summit, all creatures behold him like unto the sun arisen, O best of Bharatas, that summit is the sporting-garden of the celestials, and the Janamejaya said, How long did my great grandsires, the highsouled sons of Pandu of matchless prowess, dwell in the Gandhamadana mountain?
Do not, however, O Partha, expect peace to be possible with the foe.
Without doubt, O Rama, I shall just quell thy pride of battle!
The skin said, These arrows will not, O Alarka, cross through me.
O thou of mighty arms, I have not the least doubt of its ever being violated by thee.
Make an endeavour to secure him, for I am highly pleased at the thought of bestowing on this Naga, O Muni, my dear daughter.
Be easy, O snake!
Thus instructed by Damayanti, O king, the Brahmanas set out in all directions in search of Nala overtaken with such disaster.
O thou great in gifts!
Moved by the desire of obtaining its protection, the Creator sang this verse at Pushkara, O chief of the Kurus and foremost of virtuous men!
Indeed, Bhishma, when enraged in battle could destroy all mobile and immobile creatures, why, O Sanjaya, could he not then by his prowess, escape the son of Pandu in battle?
Sanjaya continued, Having said these words, O monarch, the valiant son of Drona yoked his steeds to his car at a corner and set out towards the direction of his enemies.
What is penance, O learned Brahmana?
Protected as they are by Vasudeva and Arjuna, I regard them, O uncle, to be irresistible by the great Indra himself.
And touching the heads of all her sons, that lady engaged in ascetic austerities said to her father, Being my sons these all are thy daughters sons, O king of kings.
Then Duhshasana, O king, having pierced Sahadeva in that battle, struck the latters driver with nine arrows.
Tell me what thou desirest to say, for I will, O Bharata, accomplish whatever thou wilt tell me.
Tell me these, in their order, O illustrious one!
And, O king, that man was reduced to ashes along with the tree itself.
Thy son Chitrasena, O king, resisted Chekitana of wrathful visage who was exerting vigorously for coming upon Bhishma.
King-fishers and parrots and herons, O king, wheeled around the son of Pandu.
Welcome to thee, O king Yudhishthira the just, Ad to thee, O Bhima.
Falsely dost thou describe thyself, O Bharata, when thou sayst in the hearing of all men that thou art a hero, O thou of wicked understanding!
Then Bhimasena, beholding the diadem-decked Phalguna encompassed, O bull of Bharatas race, by a large (Kaurava) host consisting of three kinds of forces, abandoned the small unslaughtered remnant of the Kaurava car-warriors with whom he had been engaged, and rushed impetuously, O king, to the spot where Dhananjayas car was.
When I heard that Subhadra of the race of Madhu had, after forcible seizure been married by Arjuna in the city of Dwaraka, and that the two heroes of the race of Vrishni (Krishna and Balarama the brothers of Subhadra) without resenting it had entered Indraprastha as friends, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success.
And O sinless one, knowing his strength and austerities and observance of religious vows, Indra became agitated and was overwhelmed with fear.
O virtuous one, listen to this Pauranic narrative that hath been, O thou of large eyes, heard by me, and that I shall presently narrate.
At last, O king, the Rishi granted our prayers in the matter of the children.
The man that represseth his wrath that hath been excited by (adequate) cause, becometh incapable Vasishtha continued, The Pitris replied saying, O, throw this fire that is born of thy wrath and that desireth to consume the worlds, into the waters.
Rising every day [from bed] I will pray for thy victory, O monarch.
Then, O Bharata, a great dispute arose in that sacrifice of Sakra between the ascetics as to how sacrifices should be performed, that is, should they be performed with mobile creatures or with immobile objects.
Then Rama, that oppressor of foes, spoke unto Vasudeva, saying, Why, O Janardana, sittest thou, gazing silently?
And, O thou foremost of Bharatas, the son of Jambavati then began to shower arrows in a continuous stream even as Indra showereth down rain!
The descendants of Aila, O king, as, indeed, the kings of Ikshwakus race, are, know O bull of the Bharata race, each divided into a hundred separate dynasties.
Do thou, however, O daughter, act in such a way that Satyavans work may not be neglected!
I have heard everything before, O thou that art possessed of the wealth of penances, but my curiosity is great for hearing it in detail!
O bull of Bharatas race, proceeded against Bhima for battle, like an infuriated elephant in the forest proceeding against another infuriated elephant.
Then, O prince, that Brahmana, raving like a lunatic, and repeatedly scolding Marutta with rude words, again accosted him thus, I am afflicted with a cerebral disorder, and, I always act according to the random caprices of my own mind.
Hearing this Matali became highly pleased, and addressing Narada, the charioteer said, This best of Nagas is, O sire, very acceptable to me for a son-in-law.
Indeed, O ruler of men, he informed Indra of all that Dharma’s son had said!
Kripa said, If having resolved on fight, thou hadst not come to me (thus), I would have cursed thee, O king, for thy complete overthrow.
And, O thou foremost of those acquainted with the Veda, what also did Arjuna do while dwelling there?
Then, O king, those bulls of the Chedi and the Kuru lines, thus met together, enquired after each others welfare.
Thus it was, O king, that slayer of all foes, having vanquished by conciliation and war numerous kings and having also made them pay tribute, came back to his own city.
In the thirty-sixth year from this, O slayer of Madhu, thou shalt, after causing the slaughter of thy kinsmen and friends and sons, perish by disgusting means in the wilderness.
Having obtained great joy, thy troops, O bull of Bharatas race, slept that night happily and became very cheerful.
Having caused the preliminary rites of religion, O chief of Bharata’s race, which were to bless them in the accomplishment of their design, those foremost of men cast off their sacred fires into the water.
O most excellent of the twice-born caste!
And it was thus, O monarch, that the wicked-hearted Daitya Ilwala, having fed Brahmanas, frequently took away their lives.
And on the summits of the mountain are seen amorous Kimpurushas with their paramours, mutually attached unto each other; as also, O Partha, many Gandharvas and Apsaras clad in white silk vestments; and lovely-looking Vidyadharas, wearing garlands; and mighty Nagas, and Suparnas, and Uragas, and others.
Then, O Bharata, that tiger among men, Krishna, observing Partha contemplate her with absorbed attention, said with a smile, How is this?
And addressing Yudhishthira, Arjuna continued, Thou hast, O king, certainly understood all the words spoken by Kunti and Vidura, that were repeated to thee by Devakis son.
Thus addressed by Hidimva in those woods, Hidimva, the female cannibal, at the command of her brother, went, O bull of Bharatas race, to the spot where the Pandavas were.
It behoveth thee, O divine Lord, to forgive this winged creature that perches on thy flag-staff--this fool intoxicated with pride of strength, but now rendered utterly helpless.
And Vasudeva said, What woman is there, O aunt, in the world who is like thee?
Beholding Vaikartana aim that arrow, the high-souled ruler of the Madras, addressing Karna, said, This arrow, O Karna, will not succeed in striking off Arjunas head.
Take me thither with speed, O driver, and witness my might.
The Sun’s disc, O king, seemed to be always covered with dust.
O Aswatthaman; be pleased with me and destroy my enemies.
Tell me, O Sanjaya, what those words were, mild or fierce, that Krishna, possessed of a voice deep as that of newly-risen clouds during the rainy season said unto Karna?
In those realms Dhananjaya, with his bow Gandiva, O king, vanquished innumerable Mlechecha armies one after another.
Return home, O Yavakri.
And so, O bull of Bharatas race, the other creatures dwelling in that forest, by various appliances and efforts, soon extinguished the fire.
Having, with a concentrated soul and cleansed body, heard this history duly, from the beginning, and having reached its end, one should make Sraddha offerings, O Bharata, unto those (foremost of persons who have been mentioned in it).
And, O thou foremost of speakers, they that are wise and fully conversant with proper division of time, pursue all three, virtue, wealth, and pleasure, dividing their time duly.
If, slaying the sons of Pandu with Krishna and Satwatas in battle, I indulge in such roars, what is it to thee, O Brahmana?
Having heard thy discourse I shall ordain what is for thy good or denounce a curse to thee, O Janarddana.
O best of men, be thou our messenger.
I am thy daughter Madhavi, O king, living in the woods after the manner of the deer.
Without doubt, all kings, O son, must once behold Hell.
O Kaurava, neither years, nor wrinkles, nor wealth, nor possession of friends, would entitle a Kshatriya to be regarded as a Maharatha!
O thou of magnanimous heart, be thou the king for our good.
But, O son of Bharata, from their boyhood, the friendship subsisting between those two was unequalled.
Casting off my friends and relations and the usage of my race, I have, O blessed lady, chosen this son of thine, this tiger among men, as my husband.
But, O beautiful one, when thou holdest converse with him, thou must manage it so that others may not espy thee.
Filled with rage (at this), the son of Subala, O king, once more sped at Sutasoma a number of shafts that resembled snakes of virulent poison.
Nothing could be more painful to me or to my sons themselves, O Madhava, than that they should have had to pass a period of concealment, shut up in a strangers house.
Thus addressed by Partha, Sikhandin, O bull of Bharatas race, having heard those words, rushed at the son of Ganga.
Vrihannala said, Thou shalt, O king of kings, remain clean and unpolluted.
Yayati said to him, Thou art sprung from my heart, O son!
3,000 cars, O king, despatched by thy son and headed by Dronas son, battled with Vijaya (Arjuna).
By agreeing to act as our charioteer, O thou of Vrishnis race, thou hast all along protected us!
I tell thee truly, O son, that I bear thee no malice!
Short is the period that we have of life, O thou of great puissance.
Accept me, O god.
Cut off with Parthas shafts in that great battle, that weapon fell down on the Earth, riving the hearts, as it were, O Bharata, of the (hostile) kings.
The Kuru king, O monarch, was lying there with broken thighs.
Vaisampayana continued, Then Vidura, at the command of Dhritarashtra, repaired, O Bharata, unto Yajnasena and the Pandavas.
thou and thy brothers should bathe in this river; then, O protector of the earth, thou wilt be freed from all these sins.
8 Janamejaya said, Having heard of Karnas fall and the slaughter of his sons, what, O foremost of regenerate ones, did the king say, after he had been a little comforted?
Thus, O king, were born unto Pandu five sons who were begotten by celestials and were endued with great strength, and who all lived to achieve great fame and expand the Kuru race.
Duryodhana said these words, O son of Adhiratha, O hero, do thou achieve that feat difficult of accomplishment which Drona and Bhishma have not achieved in the very sight of all the bowmen.
Then, O monarch, that warrior, invincible in battle, the son of Drona, well-equipped with armour and weapons, and supported by the Samsaptakas, fought with Arjuna.
O Bharata, beholding the youngest of you all, Sahadeva, superintending the kine, in the guise of a cowherd, I grow pale.
After that great bowman had fallen and betaken himself to his bed of arrows, it was at thy word, O tiger among men, that Drona was made our leader!
The conclusions with regard to the past, present, and future, etc, and religion, pleasure and wealth, which are all well known to conclaves of Siddhas, which appertain to remote cycles, and which are, indeed, eternal, I shall declare to thee, O thou of great wisdom.
If a large army is once routed, it is incapable of being rallied; on the other hand, beholding it broken, even those well-skilled in battle, O Bharata, become heartless.
Having rested for a little while, the valiant Bhimasena rushed furiously, O king, at Duryodhana who was standing near.
In my very sight, O Brahmana, thousands of Vrishni ladies were carried away by the Abhiras of the country of the five waters, who assailed us.
Within a very short time, Bhima slew them all, O bull of Bharatas race!
Then, O monarch, Dhritarashtra, the son of Amvika, addressed Sanjaya, who had that night come back from the camp to the city called after the elephant.
Sauti said, O thou whose wealth is asceticism, from fear of being lengthy, I shall not mention the names of all the snakes.
Thou dost not clearly see it, O bull of the Bharata race, that clouded intellect hath now possessed thy sons in consequence of their hostility to the Pandavas.
O learned one, remembering all this, judge of the honesty or otherwise of thy advisers.
With the blare of conches and the sound of drums that resembled leonine roars, O Bharata, with the neigh of steeds, and the clatter of car-wheels, with the noise of obstreperous elephants and the shouts, clapping of arm-pits, and cries of roaring combatants, the din caused everywhere was very great.
Even thus, O foremost one of Yadus race, that royal sage had, in days of yore, tilled this plain and Shakra had promised great merit unto those that would cast off their bodies here.
Having given away unto the Brahmanas diverse articles of enjoyment in profusion, Baladeva then, O king, proceeded along the southern bank of the Sarasvati.
In that very tirtha in the Krita age, Sindhudwipa of great energy, and Devapi also, O monarch, had acquired the high status of Brahmanhood.
Ashtaka then replied, Thou sayest, O monarch, that he who is older in years is worthy of regard.
Neither can cruel or avaricious, or irascible people attain to that spot, O Bharatas son.
O tiger among kings, dwelling at this spot, thou wilt be delivered from all thy sins.
Although victory hath been ours, O Krishna, our heart, however, is yet trembling in doubt!
That army, O Bharata, was covered with hundreds of arrows by those two warriors.
Having heard them, O hero, do that which may appear desirable to thee!
O king, neither Arjuna, nor Bhima, nor any of those foremost of men, viz., the twins, nor Karna, ever truthful in speech and possessed of great courage, could be deserving of Hell for a long time.
And, O best of Bharatas race, that king of kings living in Lanka, and borne upon the shoulders of men, sent three Rakshasa women to wait upon his father.
Vaisampayana said, Meanwhile, O Janamejaya, Dhritarashtra begat upon Gandhari a hundred sons, and upon a Vaisya wife another besides those hundred.
O mighty monarch!
The installation over, O monarch, Ashvatthama embraced that best of kings and left the spot, having caused the ten points to resound with his leonine roars.
9 10 Sanjaya said, After the fall of the mighty bowman Drona on that day, O Bharata, and after the purpose had been baffled of that mighty car-warriors, viz., the son of Drona, and after the vasty army, O monarch, of the Kauravas had fled away, Partha, having arrayed his own troops, stayed on the field with his brothers.
He then, O king, proceeded to the Dwaita lake.
I do not grieve, O thou of Kurus race, that Gandhari hath obtained a hundred sons.
O bull of Bharatas race, dreadful was the collision caused by the encounter of the combatants of both armies, filled with joy and staring at one another, and the elephants uttering obstreperous grunts.
Giving away diverse kinds of wealth in that foremost of tirthas, Rama also cheerfully gave away milch cows and vehicles and beds, ornaments, and food and drink of the best kinds, O king, unto many foremost of Brahmanas, after having worshipped them duly.
I would ask thee, O king, whether there are any worlds for me to enjoy as fruits of my religious merits, in heaven or the firmament.
O king, I have decided upon this.
O thou of fair eye-brows, be gracious unto me.
The two ascetics Vishvamitra and Vasishtha, O Bharata, every day challenged each other very earnestly in respect of the superiority of their penances.
O thou of mighty arms, I tell thee the truth, O sinless one!
And Bhimasena overcome by force the East and Sahadeva the South, and Nakula, O king, acquainted with all the weapons, conquered the West.
You know, O Sanjaya, all these words of an approbrious kind which were spoken at the time of the game of dice.
With eyes expanded in delight and proud of the victory he had won, Vrikodara of great energy, O king, addressed his eldest brother, saying, The Earth is today thine, O king, without brawls to disturb her and with all her thorns removed!
O mighty car-warrior, even he hath vowed my seizure.
Therefore, O tiger among men, slay the Panchalas with all their followers.
And Harivahana, calling his son unto himself in private, and consoling him in sweet words, smilingly said, O thou best of beings, having obtained thee, O child, Pritha hath to-day become a truly blessed mother.
That invincible warrior, O king, sighing repeatedly, said these words unto Bhishma, the grandsire of the Kurus, O lord, relying upon thee, as Vasudeva hath been (relied upon) by the foe, a fierce war hath been Sanjaya said, Hearing that his son Iravat had been slain, Dhananjaya was filled with great grief and sighed like a snake.
Indeed, O king, the Pandavas conscious of their own feebleness without Bhima and of our strength would not really strive to recover the kingdom.
It behoveth thee, O Kesava, to speak after reflecting on all circumstances.
All those ladies retired, O chief of the Bharatas, as also all those friends, beholding the king deeply afflicted.
From a regard for thee, the Pandavas had endeavoured to prevent the destruction of their race and the extermination of Kshatriyas, O Bharata!
Assuming the shape of a dog, I examined thee once more, O son, when thy brothers with Draupadi had fallen down.
Men are always afflicted and impeded by them, O Bharata!
Beholding Shikhandi covered (with arrows) by Kripa, O best of the kings, the mighty car-warrior Dhrishtadyumna speedily proceeded against Kripa.
And after all the Kurus had gone away, Vidura, with great care entertained that Vaisampayana said, After Kesava had dined and been refreshed, Vidura said unto him during the night, O Kesava, this advent of thine hath not been a well judged one, for, O Janardana, Dhritarashtras son transgresseth the rules of both profit and religion, is wicked and wrathful, insulteth others, though himself desirous of honours, and disobeyeth the commands of the aged.
And she said, Can gambling and the slaughter of deer, which, O chastiser of foes, occupied all wicked kings of old, be a pleasant occupation for the Pandavas?
What is thy purpose, O royal sage, for the accomplishment of which thou art tilling the soil?
Hearing these words of Radhas son of immeasurable energy Shalya replied, saying, O thou of mighty arms, proceed against Bhimasena of great might.
Conversant with every duty and usage, Narada then, O king, told him everything, as it had happened, about the awful extermination of the Kurus.
And Ansuman likewise, O great king!
There, O child, during the Parvas, he that goeth about on the shoulders of men, even Vaisravana is seen in pomp and grandeur surrounded by the Apsaras.
Formerly, O hero, thou saidst, O Partha, in that conclave of kings in Viratas city, in the presence also of Sanjaya, these words:--I will slay all the warriors of Dhritarashtras son, all of them with their followers, including, Bhishma and Drona, that would fight with me in battle--O son of Kunti, O chastiser of foes, make those words of thine true.
That router of hostile car-ranks, that car-warrior of wonderful feats in battle, commander of thy forces, Satyavan is, O king, a Maharatha.
And, O Pandava, be thou not angry with Bhima.
7 Dhritarashtra said, When all the foremost of my warriors, O Sanjaya have perished, I do not think that the remnant of my army will not perish!
Even if I have to slay a hundred Arjunas, I will not, O snake, still shoot the same shaft twice.
Having heard them, O monarch, do thou act according to them, O sinless one, if it pleases thee.
That huge elephant of Bhima then fell down, O Bharata!
Vanquished in dreadful battle by the Sutas son, O sire, those five mighty car-warriors then stood inactive, gladdening their foes, even as the objects of the senses are vanquished by a person of purified soul.
That high-souled one, O Karna, achieving great glory and slaying large numbers of my enemies protected us by fair fight for ten days.
I think, O sinless one, that both those and myself of little understanding must have committed great sins in our former lives, since, O Janardana, all our relatives and kinsmen have thus been slain by king Yudhishthira the just!
And, O dutiful girl, here are two pots of rice and milk, prepared by me with the utmost care.
Thy brother-in-law then, O monarch, with his arrows cut off into minute fragments the steeds, the standard, and the driver of his adversary, at which all the spectators uttered a loud shout.
Except thee, O son of Gotamas daughter, what foremost of all wielders of weapons of there, what warrior, indeed, equal to Mahadeva himself in battle, that would not, though competent, destroy the foe?
It is for her sake, O king, that my anger falleth on thee.
O unswerving prince!
You always say, O Brahmana, that I have got on my person all the auspicious marks, being the favourite of the divine king; that I am chaste, devoted to my lord, and destined never to become a widow.
Vaishampayana said, Every one, O king of men, is not capable of returning to his own nature at the end of his deeds.
Listen to that sacred account in its entirety, O king!
How canst thou, O Rakshasa, ravish her when I am alive?
The Gandharva said, Do thou, O lion among princes, listen to the terrible war-cry of Vasava roaring, in the heavens.
And he begot three sons in all, O best of Bharatas race.
It is seen Yudhishthira said, Thy speech, O Yajnaseni, is delightful, smooth and full of excellent phrases.
That fault, O king of kings, was thy vanity for which thou hadst become an object of contempt with all the residents of heaven.
Knowing this, O master of the universe, it behoveth thee to be gratified (with Soma)!
Our calamity arose from thee, O king!
Or if this be thy wish that, that city may be ground by me with rocks, or that I may bind Duryodhana and bring him before thee, even this will I do to-day, O thou of mighty strength.
Duryodhana said, I will not, O grandsire, give back the Pandavas their kingdom.
The heroes of the Bhoja, the Andhaka, and the Vrishni races, O Brahmana, who were all endued with high souls, great might, and leonine pride, have slaughtered one another in battle.
Yet at the advent of danger, O monarch, they began to protect it all the more carefully and fortify it (with defensive works).
It appears, O Krishna, that the victory of Yudhishthira the just is certain!
And O prince Partha (son of Pritha), when this earth has come under thy sway and that of the worshipful Yudhishthira of excellent character, there no longer remains any necessity for my staying here except for my affection for thee.
O worshipful one, women bring forth their offspring with great hazard to themselves and great pain and rear their children, O bull among Brahmanas, with great affection!
Similarly, thy son, O monarch, who was well conversant with encounters with the mace, careered beautifully and with great activity, for slaying Bhimasena.
79 Sanjaya said, Meanwhile Arjuna, O monarch, having slain the four kinds of forces (of the enemy), and having obtained a sight of the angry son of the Suta in that dreadful battle, caused a river of blood to flow there that was tawny with flesh and marrow and bones.
44 Shalya said, These, O Karna, are ravings that thou utterest regarding the foe.
As long as I am alive, O great king, it behoveth thee not to entertain any fear of Drona, although he is the foremost of all wielders of weapons.
Thus addressed, Phalguna, well conversant with speech, humbly approached king Yudhishthira the just and then said these words.--Vasudeva here, of great prowess, O king, is long absent from home.
And hither and thither some pierced by javelins, and some cut asunder by battle-axes, and some crushed by elephants and others trod down by horses, and some cut by car-wheels, and some by axes, loudly called upon their kinsmen, O king.
Thou wert formerly my friend, and, O ruler of men, thou art also related to me.
Having strewn the earth with the faces, beautiful as the lotus, of thousands of kings, this Satyaki is coming to thee, O Partha!
O Brahmana, what did Dhritarashtra of great wisdom say, when he heard of them?
That dust, however, O tiger among men, was soon dispelled by the blood that was shed, and all the points of the compass became once more clear when that dusty darkness was driven away.
Tell me, therefore, O Sanjaya, what the (assembled) kings did after Devavrata, that bull of Kuras race, had fallen.
No man should set himself to any task depending upon the counsels of another, for, O son of Kurus race, the minds of two persons seldom agree in any particular act.
When I heard that the five Pandavas with their mother Kunti had escaped from the house of lac, and that Vidura was engaged in the accomplishment of their designs, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success.
Sakuni said, O king, O lord of the earth, what folly hath taken possession of thee!
After having conversed on various subjects, Dharmas son Yudhishthira addressed Vyasa and said, This treasure, O holy one, which has been brought through thy grace I wish to devote to that great sacrifice known by the name of the horse-sacrifice.
Follow thou, O son of Gandhari, the practice that is worthy of the Kuru race.
And endowed with ascetic merit, Manu, O ornament of Bharatas race, again set about his work of creating all beings in proper and exact order.
Gandhari, conversant with every duty, bore her sorrow with fortitude, and loaded as her heart was, O king, said nothing.
O Aswatthaman, O chastiser of foes, go thither with speed.
Then Hridikas son, O king, quickly and fearlessly received that invincible warrior, that irresistible and mighty bowman, as he advanced (against the beaten army).
O Brahmana, for friendship only I pardon thee this thy offence.
O amiable one, joining my palms furnished with rosy fingers, and making of them a cup as of lotus leaves, I place them on my head to propitiate thee.
And, O Janamejaya, growing in strength, he began then to consume the forest of Khandava.
Knowing this that has happened, do, O Madhava, that which is beneficial.
Of such prowess, O chief of Bharatas race, was the ascetic Utanka.
The Ashvinis, O bull of Bharatas race, with gratified hearts, gave unto Skanda two companions Vardhana and Nandana, who had mastered all the sciences.
For these reasons, O wretch, thy life must be taken!
Arrived on the banks of the sacred stream Oghavati, O king, the Pandavas, reft of foes, took up their quarters there for that night!
And Narada said, O lord, O divine one, peace attendeth us in every respect.
Uttering soft cries that winged creature, O Bharata, secretly approached the branches of that banyan.
As regards Ashvatthama and Bhimasena, O Bharata, both of them were achievers of cruel feats.
Hearing the command of Saudasa, that lady of large eyes replied unto the highly intelligent Utanka, O Janamejaya, in these words: It is even so, O regenerate one.
O blessed lady, go whithersoever thou wishest, without spending thy time in vain!
Vaisampayana said, Thus despatched by her elder brother, the far-famed daughter of king Matsya, adorned with a golden necklace, ever obedient to her brother and possessed of a waist slender as that of the O Vrihannala, hath spoken about thy skill in the management of steeds.
The ape-bannered son of Kunti, thus addressed by his son, answered the child of Chitrangada, saying Thou knowest, O mighty-armed one, what vow I am observing.
59 60 61 Dhritarashtra said, When Bhima and Pandus son Yudhishthira were engaged in battle, when my troops were being slaughtered by the Pandus and the Srinjayas, when, indeed, my vast army being broken and routed repeatedly became cheerless, tell me, O Sanjaya, what the Kauravas did.
O Krishna, strive thou, therefore, to bring about peace with the foe.
Sanjaya continued, Hearing this fallacious discourse from Keshava, O king, Rama failed to dispel his wrath and became cheerful.
Hanging down his head in shame, the diadem-decked Arjuna, with joined hands, addressed Yudhishthira, and said, Be cheerful, O king, forgiving me.
And his charioteer then, beholding him senseless, speedily bore him away, O king, from battle.
As Krishna is the foremost of all holders of reins for Partha in battle, even so, O king, be thou the foremost of all holders of reins for Karnas car.
O king!
Hearing these words of his mother, Bhima said, Ascertain, O mother the nature of the Brahmanas distress and whence also it hath arisen.
That army of Pandus son, thus scorched by the son of Drona, became exceedingly agitated, O chief of the Bharatas, like the mouth of a river by a whale.
Indeed, those heroes, O king, encountering one another in that battle, pierced one another with many keen arrows equipped with Kanka and peacock feathers, winged with gold, whetted on stone, and sped from bow-strings drawn to their ears.
Rise up, O king!
Do not yield to grief, O chief of the Bharatas.
O descendant of Vasishthas race, that which befell thy father was brought about by his own curse.
Thou art now reaping the fruit, O Dhritarashtra, of having made over the kingdom to an ignorant fool of wicked soul, possessed by avarice and having wicked counsellors.
Avoid them, O Dhritarashtra, that are eminent in wealth but destitute of good qualities!
Struck with fear for the increase of the human population of the world they addressed the Master of creation and said, Alarmed, O lord, at the increase of human beings on earth, we come to thee for relief.
O ruler of the earth!
Astika asked, Why wert thou, O mother, bestowed on my father by my uncle?
Its fever dispelled, the army of the Pandavas, abounding with great bowmen and mighty car-warriors having reached the shore as it were, became very happy that night, in consequence of the victory, O sire, it had won by the slaughter of Karna.
Similarly Yudhishthira, O king, beholding the Pandava army disposed in array, regarded the Dhartarashtras with Karna to be already slain.
Sanjaya said, Upon the fall of Drona, O king, the Kurus, afflicted with weapons, deprived of their leader, broken and routed, became filled with exertion, and deprived of energy through grief.
--While others cried aloud, Oh, Bhima!--O Phalguna!
When the troops stood arrayed, O bull of Bharatas race, the Sun rose divested of splendour, and the Earth trembled with a loud sound, and cracked in many places, O chief of the Bharatas, with loud noise.
O regenerate one, tell me the truths of the duties of the Kshatriya order.
O, fulfil my wishes!
Those words have been spoken by this king, O thou of immeasurable prowess, in thy presence, O Govinda!
Vaisampayana continued, Then king Yudhishthira addressed Nakula saying, Do thou, O son of Madri, climb this tree and look around the ten points of the horizon.
Then the king replied, This request of thine, O hawk, I consider as a favour unto me, and, therefore, I will give unto thee even my own flesh, after weighing it in a balance.
That host, thus struck and broken by firm bowmen, O monarch, fled away on all sides in the very sight of thy sons.
Astika thereupon replied, Gold, silver or kine, I do not ask of thee, O monarch!
With this wealth, O king, I will stake with thee!
O blessed and illustrious lady, it was I alone amongst the Pandavas who knew the income and expenditure of the king and what their whole wealth was.
Markandeya answered him saying, Hear, O king, about the behaviour of Brahmanas in days of old.
Wearied by my fast journey and very much fatigued, I solicit thy permission to go to bed now, O lion of men, for tomorrow morning will the Kurus, assembled together in the council-hall, hear the words of Ajatasatru.
Then Bhima, recollecting his own vow, addressed Yudhishthira, saying, This one should not be slain by thee, O king.
This vow, O Partha, was adopted by thee before from foolishness.
The king, O monarch reflecting on his woes, became speechless.
Either rule the wide earth after vanquishing us, or sleep, O Bharata, on the bare ground, slain by us!
And, O monarch, let the man know also that both thyself and Duryodhana have become exceedingly glad in consequence of what hath happened.
Tell me all this, O Sanjaya!
O famous lady, the number of thy sons will never be less than five.
O chastiser of foes, do not, from delusion of understanding, disregard Madhava.
Tell me everything, O Sanjaya, about it!
The celestials, O tiger among king, with Brihaspati at their head, having succeeded in finding out the god, became very glad with Vasava amongst them.
And, O Janamejaya, at sight of this the hero could not resolve upon what he should do.
There is wealth still left to thee, O king.
O play now with the wealth that is still left unto thee, even with Bhima thy dear brother, as thy stake, O son of Pandu.
Similarly Kritavarma, O king, fighting with the grandson of Sini, that scorcher of foes, looked resplendent, like Shakra battling with the Asura Vala.
Vidura said,--O monarch, Sakuni, the king of Gandhara, an adept at dice, having great skill of hand and desperate in stakes, Vivingati, king Chitrasena, Satyavrata, Purumitra and Jaya, these, O king, are there.
O bull of the Bharata race, that king of virtuous soul paid his debt to nature in time, Observing my pledge, O chief of the Bharatas, I then installed my brother, Chitrangada, on the throne of the extensive kingdom of the Kurus.
He next pierced two angry sons of Madri, and Bhimasena the son of Pandu, and Yudhishthira, O thou of Kurus race, with ten arrows each.
Janemejaya said, O illustrious one, I desire to hear in detail the history of the acquisition of weapons by Arjuna of spotless deeds.
Dhritarashtra said, Tell us, O Sanjaya, of the forces of Dhrishtadyumna, as also of the Somakas, and of all others, with which the Pandavas intend to fight with us.
In consequence of having vanquished thy foes and of thy having slain Duryodhana, by good luck, O Bhima, thy fame hath spread over the whole world!
Be thou assured of this, O king.
Issue your commands, O king, as to what he should do.
Why then, O regenerate one, will Hrishikesa trust my words?
O son of Pandu, I would rather yield up my life in battle than fight against my preceptor.
O king those amongst the Kurus that have thee for their ruler, and the intelligent Vidura conversant with every branch of learning for their counsellor, have, indeed, nothing to grieve for.
There is no one that approveth thy conduct, O Bhishma, in unceasingly praising with devotion, from ignorance alone, Kesava so unworthy of praise.
Let a number of foremost cars, O monarch, with excellent steeds yoked unto them, always follow me, O bull of Bharatas race.
And, O king, if a person worketh (hard), his debt (to the gods) is cancelled (whether he achieveth success or not).
Seeing the hero of the plough, king Yudhishthira, O Bharata, stood up and duly honoured him, feeling great joy the while.
That man, O Saunaka, who hears this history, placing a Brahmana before him, acquires both fame and the fruition of all his wishes.
Truly do I say, O father, that without him I will not live.
Krishna continued,--O thou foremost of the Bharata race, the handsome daughters of the king of Kasi, having obtained the child, soon drenched it with their lacteal streams.
In this way, O thou sinless one, thy word will be rendered true, and the worlds with the gods will not be destroyed.
Sanjaya continued, Beholding that chief of Kurus race lying on the ground, Ashvatthama, O best of the Bharatas, uttered these piteous lamentations: O tiger among kings, all people indicated thee as the foremost of all bowmen!
Thy son then, O monarch, said unto Kripa, Let the son of Drona, O foremost of Brahmanas, (blessed be thou), be at my command installed as generalissimo, if thou wishest to do me the good!
O thou that art of righteous behaviour, it is exceedingly difficult for one that is of righteous behaviour to perpetrate an act that is unrighteous.
O Bharata, I am an adept at dice, superior to all in the world.
Then, these tigers among men, O king, are thy allies!
And Ruru, the possessor of the six attributes, comforting the snake addressed it, saying, Tell me fully, O snake, who art thou thus metamorphosed?
Thy vow also, O Arjuna, should be kept.
O sinless one, tell me how that hero, that chastiser of foes, rushed against the Pandavas in battle, and slaughtered the Somakas.
There, O Bharata, elephants, assailed with arrows by Karna, fled away on all sides in fear and caused a great agitation on the field of battle.
And, O Sesha, by holding the Earth, thou shalt certainly do what is prized by me very greatly.
When he heard these words (proceeding) from the sky, he had faith therein, and did all that he was directed to do, O chief of the men of Bharatas race!
Take me, O thou of large eyes, me--a maiden come to thee of her own accord--one unbetrothed to another, one desirous of thy grace!
The Pandavas also, O best of Brahmanas, have acquired great fame.
An instant after Drona asked him as in the case of others, Seest thou, O Arjuna, the bird there, the tree, and myself?
And then the mighty Srutayush excited with wrath, shot at Bhima many sharp arrows, displaying his lightness of hand, and that mighty warrior, Bhima, forcibly struck with those nine sharp arrows shot by Kalinga from his excellent bow, yielded to great wrath, O king, like a snake struck with a rod.
Having achieved those feats in battle that were applauded by all noble persons and that could not be achieved by other men, the high-souled Nakula of great activity, afflicted with those shafts, proceeded to the car, O king, of Bhimasena.
Hence, O Bharata, regions of inexhaustible felicity are thine.
Hearing those words of Vidura, the son of Vichitravirya, wondering, said in great glee, What good luck, O Vidura!
And once more Chitrasena, O monarch, in that battle, pierced Satanika in the chest with nine keen shafts.
Hearing those shouts of thy army, king Yudhishthira, addressing him of Vrishnis race, said these words, in the hearing of all the Kshatriyas, The ruler of the Madras, Shalya, that great bowman who is highly regarded by all the warriors hath, O Madhava, been made the leader of his forces by Dhritarashtras son.
4 Vaishampayana said, Hearing this intelligence, O monarch, Dhritarashtra the son of Ambika, feeling the acme of grief, regarded Suyodhana to be already dead.
Once again, O lord, king Yayati performed a sacrifice there.
Thus, O monarch, I will, without doubt, bring Yudhishthira, the son of Dharma, along with his followers, under control.
It was a wicked act, O Vrikodara, that was then accomplished by thee!
And thereupon, the Narada continued, Unto Galava uttering these and many other words of entreaty and sorrow, the son of Vinata, without slackening his speed, laughingly replied, saying, Thou hast little wisdom, O regenerate Rishi, since thou wishest to put an end to thy own life.
As soon as the latter obtained a sight of the blind monarch possessed of great power, the three heroes sighed in grief and with voices choked in tears weepingly addressed him, saying, ‘Thy royal son, O king, having achieved the most difficult feats, has, with all his followers, gone to the region of Indra.
Bhishma said, This wicked son of thine, O Dhritarashtra, hath his hour come.
Vyasa thereupon said,--As the numerous offspring of the Prajapati Daksha, the Asuras and the Celestials challenged each other (to encounter), so in the same way Angiras sons, the exceedingly energetic Vrihaspati and the ascetic, Samvarta, of equal vows, challenged each other, O king.
Encompassing Dhritarashtra said, O Suta, O Sanjaya, this grievous result that has now overtaken us is, I think, certainly due to my evil policy.
O king, O best of men, thou wilt have to do it solely for my sake, though it may not be proper to be done.
Indeed, of the weapons, O son of Pandu, the portion that still remains is not capable of being borne, if placed on carts, by six bullocks.
Be inclined to grace, O illustrious one!
The Grandsire of the worlds, Brahman, and Kasyapa of great energy, and the others (mentioned and) not mentioned, all poured water upon Skanda even as, O monarch, the gods had poured water on the head of Varuna, the lord of waters, for investing him with dominion.
Reflecting upon all this, and thinking also of thy own transgressions, cherish good feeling towards the Pandavas, I bow to thee, O bull of Bharatas race!
O lord of all the gods, show favour to these.
What shall we accomplish for thee, O child!
And it was thus that Indra pondered in his mind; and, O best of Bharatas race, endued with intelligence, he ordered the celestial nymphs to tempt the son of Twashtri.
In consequence of those falling showers, of shafts, O monarch, colliding with one another, a conflagration seemed to blaze forth in the welkin.
O Karna?
O thou of a hundred eyes, do thou perform the sacrifice with seeds of grain that have been kept for three years.
Thou then didst marry her, O king, to the daughter of the king of the Dasarnakas.
Dhrishtaketu, O monarch, that foremost of car-warriors among the Cedis, after accomplishing the most difficult feats, hath repaired to the abode of Yama.
It resembled, O lord, a she-snake of virulent poison, frequently darting out her tongue.
Thereupon the lord of treasures said, At Kusasthali, O king, once there was held a conclave of the gods.
Know O lord, even this is the boon that I ask.
And, O Madhava, let also that daughter-in-law, and her companions, be comforted by thee; O lord, comfort them with soothing words that are again fraught with truth.
3 Sanjaya said, Hear, O king, with attention, how that great carnage of the Kurus and the Pandavas occurred when they encountered each other.
He, O king, for whom thou grievest now lies within a lake whose waters have been solidified by him!
And beholding the (Kuru) host that resembled the limitless ocean, thy son Duryodhana, O king, stationed within it, said unto all the combatants on thy side, Cased in mail (as ye are), begin ye the fight.
Vaisampayana continued, Thus addressed by Viratas wife, O Janamejaya, Krishna (Draupadi) ever devoted to her lords, began to live in that city.
Incapable of speaking of my merits, thou sayst many bitter things, O thou of wicked heart; Karna was never born, O Madraka, for fear in battle.
Then thy son, O bull of Bharatas race, singling out Chekitana amongst those rushing heroes, pierced him deeply with a lance in the chest.
O thou of great vows, we have heard this in heaven!
His face and eyes were of a coppery hue, O thou of Kurus race, and he seemed to blaze forth with energy.
Their relatives, O prince, casting aside their weapons are tending them, weeping incessantly.
Now that Vidura hath gone away, this is the time, O Suyodhana (Duryodhana), for telling me what thou hast hit upon, and what, O Radheya (Karna), thou too hast hit upon.
O king, if thou abandonest him, there remain yet thy nine and ninety sons.
And, O thou of unfading glory, this history, destructive of the influence of Kali, is capable, O king, of comforting persons Vaisampayana continued, King Yudhishthira then, with a glad heart, said unto Vrihadaswa, O illustrious one, I desire to learn the science of dice from thee.
O leader of the tribe of Kurus!
It was for this reason, O thou best of men, that the monarch infected with the Brahmanis curse, appointed Vasishtha to beget a son upon his queen.
For protecting thyself as also thy brothers, O Bharata, shoot in this battle that weapon which is capable of neutralising all weapons.
O revered one, if I survive thee, it is certain I shall not be able to rear thy children as if they were mine.
Arjuna said, Tell me, O holy one, this story that I may understand it, viz., this illustration about Valaka and about Kausika (living) among rivers.
The time hath come, O foremost of men, for me to go to some other king for alms.
Between the two kinds of acts, war and peace, the latter, O Vibhatsu, is perhaps within my power.
Viewing his relationship of grandsire unto them, the sons of Pandu, O sire, were spared in dreadful battle by Bhishma for ten successive days!
Old and decrepit as I am, O son, hunger scarcely afflicts me.
He, O monarch, will roam amid thy enemys troops like Death himself.
All the denizens of heaven, O king, brought there everything necessary for the ceremony and every auspicious article.
The aspect presented, O chief of the Bharatas, by the lances hurled all around, became like that of swarms of locusts in the welkin.
To frighten one that has sought protection, the slaying of a woman, the theft of what belongs to a Brahmana, and injuring a friend, each of these four, O Shakra, is I think equal to the abandonment of one that is devoted.’ Vaishampayana continued: Hearing these words of king Yudhishthira the just, (the dog became transformed into) the deity of Righteousness, who, well pleased, said these words unto him in a sweet voice fraught with praise.
Both of us, O great king, throw ourselves on thy mercy.
How, indeed, couldst thou, O Child, encounter that Karna who leaveth not a single mark unhit amongst even a thousand that he may aim at all at once?
Approaching the lake within which lay the king, they addressed that invincible ruler of men asleep within the water, saying, Arise, O king, and fight with us against Yudhishthira!
O great king, the man that doth every kind of injury to other men, deserveth to be slain by all men in consequence of those censurable deeds of his.
Some, arraying their cars in the order, O king, of superiors and inferiors, advanced against the Pandavas once more for battle.
When king Duryodhana, the son of Dhritarashtra, coveting our kingdom, plunged us into misery and even slavery, then, O Bhima, it was Draupadi that rescued us.
O thou of mighty arms, say unto that tiger among men, Arjuna, that foremost of all wielders of weapons, that he should always tread in the path that may be pointed out by Draupadi.
O divine Lord, be inclined to grace.
Therefore, O my son, thou art never guided by avarice in any of thy dealings.
Do thou, O illustrious one, tell me all this!
When, however, disregarding me thou hast interfered with my foods, thou hast, O Vasava, inflicted disgrace on me, like this younger brother of thine that had hitherto been disgracing me by making me bear him on my back.
O sinless one, these all, equal to the celestials themselves, behold with their eyes what Is written in the Vedas, and describe virtue as the foremost duty!
Hath thy delusion, (caused) by ignorance, been destroyed, O Dhananjaya?
It can never be otherwise, O beautiful one!
I accept, therefore, O king, thy daughter Uttara as my daughter-in-law.
O thou who knowest what virtue is, it was by righteousness alone that the king has been able to regain his kingdom free from all enemies (thorns), and it was by the action of righteousness that king Suyodhana has been killed in battle, and, O son of Pritha and pillar of the Kuru race, the wicked sons of Dhritarashtra, avaricious, always rude in speech, and bent upon an unrighteous course of conduct, having been exterminated with their followers, the king, the son of Dharma and lord of the earth, now peaceably enjoys the entire kingdom of the earth with thy aid, and I too, O son of Pandu, have been pleasantly whiling away my time in thy company, amidst woodland scenes.
O thou of a thousand sacrifices, the good never approve of speaking highly of their own strength, nor do they speak of their own merits.
Let those sons of Bharata (the Pandavas), be, O ruler of men, thy allies.
O son of Ambika, thou hast brought up those children and taught them everything.
Do thou cease to follow me, O foremost one of Kurus race, along with Bhima and others.
Moving away from that spot, O king, those great car-warriors, with hearts plunged in anxiety, took one another’s leave and separated from one another.
He, on the other hand, O king, is a wicked-souled wight!
And, O best of kings, the gods with Agni at their head, when they heard her words, deliberated, intent upon what would promote the interests of Indra.
Therefore, O son of Kunti, this king should not be oppressed by thee.
O son of Pandu, being what I am, I desire to do something for thee.
Behold, I go into extinction!--Then Udana, after having gone into extinction, began once more to move about, Prana and Apana and Samana and Vyana said, unto him, O Udana, thou art not the foremost one among us, only Vyana is under thy dominion.
O Vrikodara.
After Vidura had said these words, O Janamejaya, Dhritarashtra his satisfaction at them and set his heart upon making large presents on the day of full moon in the month of Kartika.
Indeed, O Bharata, (let alone the four I have mentioned) all these kings together, with thee at their head, are incapable of even looking at the face of Bhima, when angry, on the field of battle.
of the Airavatas, uttered by the Nagas headed by Vasuki, O Janamejaya.
Therefore, O Turvasu, thy race shall be extinct.
And Viswamitra, accompanied by his ministers, used to roam in quest of deer through the deep woods and over picturesque marascetic Vaisampayana said, That bull among the Bharatas, Arjuna, hearing these words of the Gandharva, was inspired with feelings of devotion and stood And, O prince, the son of Gadhi, gratified with everything and applauding the cow named Nandini, addressed the Rishi, saying, O Brahmana, O great Muni, give me thy Naridini in exchange for ten thousand kine, or my kingdom.
Thou art now for the practice of virtue, O Suta, but thou shalt not escape with life.
Queen Gandhari also, O monarch, along with Kunti, assumed barks of trees and deer-skins for her robe, and set herself to the observance of the same vows as her lord.
Know, O king, that he will be the cause of death of ye all.
Then in this fierce and terrible battle, O prince, thy friend, breaking the mighty array (of the foe), hath penetrated into it.
Why then, O king, dost thou tolerate our foes when they are thus slaying our troops?
Thus pierced on the forehead with those straight shafts, Yuyudhana, O king, looked beautiful like a mountain with three summits.
O perpetuator of Bhrigus race, by acting even thus, thou wilt attain to what is beneficial to thee.
Thou art, O king, senior to us in age, and possessed of the highest accomplishments.
O son, thou wert born in the palace of Kuntiraja.
Depart then, O son.
O bull of the Bharata race, who is there that will provoke the peaceful sons of Pritha?
Therefore, O child, by our command, set thy heart upon marriage and offspring.
Then the mighty chief of saints, Kapila spake to him, saying, I shall grant thee everything that thou desirest, O stainless (prince).
O Devayani, do not grieve, do not cry.
Vaishampayana said, After the high-souled Pandavas had taken up their post at Upaplavya, they despatched the slayer of Madhu to Dhritarashtras presence, for the object of peace, O mighty-armed one, and for the good of all creatures.
O holy one, thou art capable of answering all questions; I desire to hear thee discourse on all this.
O thou whose wealth is asceticism, the sons of these snakes, with their grandsons, are innumerable.
This, indeed, is the third test, O king, to which I put thee.
Shalya said, Today, O king, I will either slay all the Pancalas with the Pandavas in battle, or, slain by them, proceed to heaven.
When, O great king, that foremost of men, Karna, thus came out, king Yudhishthira the just, casting his eyes on Arjuna, said these words: Behold, O Partha, how the Dhartarashtra force, O hero, in this battle, protected by heroes and mighty car-warriors, hath been arrayed by Karna!
Vaisampayana said, O king, saying this Dhritarashtra rose suddenly and went into the inner apartments.
The blazing splendour of those feats, O monarch, appeared full in view.
In physical strength, in courage, in knowledge of (weapons), in prowess, O Bharata, in aiming, Savyasaci is never my equal.
Those foremost of car-warriors rushed with speed against the son of Pandu like a couple of tigers, O king, in the deep forest rushing against an elephant from desire of slaying him.
O Brahmana, even he is the charioteer of Surya, always seen in the hour of morning!
When this will happen, O prince of snakes, Arjuna will be freed from our curse.
Behind him was Bhima; next walked Arjuna; after him were the twins in the order of their birth; behind them all, O foremost one of Bharata’s race, proceeded Draupadi, that first of women, possessed of great beauty, of dark complexion, and endued with eyes resembling lotus petals.
Having heard these words, king Bhagiratha directed his course towards the spot where lay those bodies of mighty Sagaras sons, in order that, O most praiseworthy of men, the holy water might flood (the same).
Swarming with numerous snakes, O monarch, it was the abode of Vasuki of great splendour, the king of the snakes.
Bent upon winning the victory, O king, he quickly said unto his rival, Thou art slain, O Phalguna!
Therefore, O Bharata, follow thou counsels of peace.
O slayer of Arjuna said,--What, O Kesava, are the indications of one whose mind is fixed on contemplation?
34 Sanjaya said, When that fierce battle, O monarch, was about to commence, and when all the high-souled Pandavas had taken their seats, indeed, having heard that battle between those two heroes, both of whom were his disciples, was about to begin, Rama, whose banner bore the device of the palmyra palm, and who owns the plough for his weapon, came to that spot.
Thus did the battle take place that day, O Bharata, between the Kurus and the Pandavas headed by Ghatotkacha.
Behold the fruit of these my roars, O Brahmana!
I do not, however, at the same time, venture to obstruct thy penances, O righteous lady.
I will, however, O perpetuator of Bhrigus race, go thither, O thou endued with wealth of asceticism, where I may (obtain the means to) myself slay Bhishma in battle!
Suffused with shame, O monarch, the king then addressed Saradwats son, saying, Blessed be thou, say thou, before others, why the army is thus flying away.
And from that day, O king, the Asura Ilwala became a destroyer of Brahmanas.
With these as thy supporters and with the sons of Pandu also, thou wilt, O Bharata, be able to conquer all thy foes.
Hearing this, O fortunate one, do what thou pleasest.
Baffling all those shafts decked with gold, Dhrishtadyumna, O king, looked resplendent in that battle in his wounds.
Even thus, O king, in consequence of thy evil counsels, did that destruction set in on Earth, O lord of Earth, of both thy warriors and those of the enemy.
Others, borne away from their own divisions into the midst of others, were, O king, mangled by huge elephants which rolled them repeatedly on the ground.
These and many other mothers, O bull of Bharatas race, numbering by thousands, of diverse forms, became the followers of Kartikeya.
O child, it was not from incapacity that the Bhrigus of souls under complete control were, all of them, indifferent to their own destruction at the hands of the murderous Kshatriyas.
O Suyodhana, give unto thy five brothers at least five villages,--O Sanjaya, O thou of great wisdom, let there be peace between us and our cousins.
Indeed, that swelling and highly efficient host of the high-souled Pandavas, would, O Sanjaya, excite the keenest fears of even the three worlds.
Therefore, O lord of all creatures, place her on my head.
Lomasa said, There is the land, O Kuntis son, where the Kalinga tribes dwell.
Stand here, O Suyodhana.
Thou art truly, O blessed damsel, the foremost of all persons observing the duties of righteousness.
The brave Pandavas also, O king, bearing in mind the many injuries of diverse kinds inflicted upon them before by thee and thy son, O monarch, and casting off all fear, and eager to win the highest heavens, cheerfully fought with thy son and the other warriors of thy army.
Many warriors among the Cedis and the Pancalas, O Bharata, that were regarded as heroes, were slain by the single-handed Karna in that battle who fought with them, proclaiming his name, in every instance.
Utanka said, If, O Brahmana, the ear-rings be not recovered by me from the regions of the Nagas, I shall cast off my life-breaths before thy eyes, O foremost of regenerate persons!
Draupadi said, ‘O venerable dame, where have all your grandsons, with Abhimanyu among them, gone?
The latter, deeply pierced by the mighty son of Drona, fell into a swoon, O king, abandoning the reins of the steeds.
Thus, O son of Pritha, did Savitri raise from pitiable plight to high fortune, herself, and her father and mother, her father-in-law and mother-in-law, as also the race of her husband.
Steadfastly gazed at by the enemy, we slowly left, O monarch, the field of battle, having sustained a severe loss and nearly deprived of our senses.
O Janardana, the cause must be very grave when at such a time thou feelest such joy.
And I shall relate to you in detail, O Brahmana, the entire history of Ruru of abundant energy.
and sometimes saying, Excellent, O Arjuna!
Hear, O king, what that conquerer of hostile towns, Vabhru of mighty energy and Daruka then said to Krishna, ‘O holy one, a very large number of men has been slain by thee.
Go now, O Bhishma, for in this combat thou hast pleased me highly!
Sanjaya said, Thou askest me, O monarch, about the prowess of the ruler of the Sindhus.
At the same time, O best of regenerate persons, I think that that is as much mine as it is of others.
After he was tired with the exertions he made, he ceased, O Bharata!
O thou of ascetic wealth tell me all this in detail, for, O Brahmana, I desire to hear thee narrate the history of those heroes possessed of abundant prowess and lustre.
The wife of the Brahmana said, Where is that foremost, O thou of great wisdom?
Then thy son, O ruler of men, with great speed and care, forcibly struck Sahadevas head with a lance.
Therefore, O chief of Bharatas race, thou must now prepare to carry the struggle against thy mind, and by dint of abstraction and the merit of thine own Karma, thou must reach the other side of (overcome) the mysterious and unintelligible (mind).
O lord, raise me from this unfathomable ocean of sorrow.
And O mighty monarch, not finding her lord Naishadha, afflicted with grief and pain, she shrieked aloud in fright, saying, O lord?
This, O sir, hath been an act of great kindness done to me by the Gandharvas.
And, O Galava, because the abode of all the treasures of the north stretches in a line towards the east and the west, therefore is the north sometimes called the central region (madhyama).
Striking us, again, with the cruel goad of thy speeches, O king, do not provoke our wrath.
Piercing his thigh, O king, it struck to it and remained there.
Then also, O monarch, that battle became fierce and awful since the warriors were all resolved to lay down their lives and since all of them fought, making life the stake.
O handsome one, gifted with so much beauty and such virtues, whence hast thou come?
Suddenly, O monarch, he shrouded that remnant of thy forces with arrows.
Comfort thy Vibhatsu, and bless him, O sinless one, with thy wishes for his victory.
Ornaments, O chief of Bharata’s race, for the arms, as also those for the ears, should be given.
Thou hast compassion for all creatures, O Bharata, of which this is a bright example.
I shall give it to thee, O thou of excellent vows.
All were virtuous, and did everything from virtuous motives, O tiger among men.
O mighty-armed one, no fifth person can be found (to achieve that teat).
O Visoka, beholding hostile warriors and cars and the tops of their standards on all sides, I am greatly afflicted.
And thou shouldst then, O king, unhesitatingly act either for acquiring them, or abandoning them all.
Therefore, O driver, proceed slowly and take up thy position in the rear.
And, O monarch, he hath been highly pleased with this alliance with thee.
Where is Vidura, O king?
As regards yourselves, abandoning enmity, cease ye from the fight, ye kings-- Then at the proper time, the mighty Madhava, approaching the Pandavas, those mighty car-warriors cheerfully seated together and filled with joy at the fall of Bhishma, said unto Dharmas son Yudhishthira these words,--By good luck victory hath been thine, O thou of Kurus rare!
He then gave, O monarch, unto the Pandavas and Kunti and Draupadi, and unto Drupada and Drupadas sons, the gems and various kinds of wealth that the Kauravas had sent through him.
Dhritarashtra said,--Tell me truly (O Sanjaya) of this Varsha that is called after Bharata, where this senseless force hath been collected, in respect of which this my son Duryodhana hath been so very covetous, which the sons of Pandu also are desirous of obtaining, and in which my mind too sinketh.
If thou feelest any curiosity, then hasten, O Madhava, without tarrying here!
Favour thou the heroic sons of Pandu, O monarch, and let a few villages be assigned to them for their maintenance.
It behoveth thee, O king of kings, to now discharge the rites of water to their honour, with all thy brothers.
With his thighs broken, the king, O monarch, covered with dust, gathered his flowing locks, casting his eyes on all sides.
Thy regions, O Yudhishthira, are above, those of kings.
And then Arjuna also, O king, excited with rage, showered arrows on thy army like the clouds pouring rain in torrents.
Hearing these words of his wife, Agastya replied, O blessed girl, O thou of slender waist, I have not wealth like what thy father hath, O Lopamudra!
O bull of the Bharata race, such is the assembly room of Varuna seen by me before, in the course of my wanderings.
Even this, O king, is the virtue ordained by God himself for the order to which thou belongest!
O wielder of the trident, thou art the refuge of this universe consisting of gods and Asuras!
Yudhishthira said, Alas, I ask thee, therefore., O preceptor, listen to my words.--Saying this, the king, greatly agitated and deprived of his sense, stood silent.
There, the wrathful Bhima, abandoned by the Pandavas and the Srinjayas, and surrounded by my warriors, delighteth me greatly, O Karna!
The battle that took place between the two was beautiful and fierce, like that which had occurred in days of yore between Vasava and the Asura Jambha, O lord!
That person, O monarch, who gives unto all creatures an assurance of his harmlessness, goes to the highest of regions, the blessed realm of Vishnu.
Think coolly then, O brother, who amongst us is stronger?
And thereupon he questioned him, Why art thou, O Brahmana!
The beautiful forms of elephants and steeds and human beings, O king, then resembled cloths foul with dirt, and became exceedingly repulsive to look at.
‘O son, thou shouldst not bear in mind the woes inflicted on thee on account of the match at dice.
For, O foremost of monarchs, those wretches ever wish unto thee who art firm in virtue!
O Kausika, by the force of my asceticism.
The hawk then said, I am Indra, O virtuous king, and this pigeon is Agni, the carrier of the sacrificial clarified butter.
Come, O chief of men, all of them have been cleansed of their sins.
Drawing deep breaths and looking repeatedly at me, thy son touched me with his hand and said, Except thee, O Sanjaya, there is none else that liveth, amongst those engaged in this battle!
Dhritarashtra said, Tell me, O Sanjaya, how the battle took place between the heroic Karna and Satyaki of the Vrishni race, after the fall of Bhurisravas and of the ruler of the Sindhus.
Having perpetrated such grievous sin, fight now, O Bharata!
Relent, O tiger among kings.
Shikhandis son Kshatradeva, that foremost of warriors, possessed of great bravery, hath, O king, been slain by thy grandson Lakshmana, O sire!
Indra replied, At thy bidding, O powerful being, I shall continue to act as Indra.
Dharma said: ‘Thou art well born, O king of kings, and possessed of the intelligence and the good conduct of Pandu.
Having duly worshipped king Dhritarashtra, he uttered an exclamation of woe and then began, I am Sanjaya, O lord of Earth!
Hearing these words of the Island-born, the grandson of Sini, joined his hands, and then, setting me free said unto me, Peace to thee, O Sanjaya, thou mayest go hence!
Men know, O Karna, that the waters of the ocean are as limitless as space.
The sacred fire, O monarch, (belonging Vaisampayana continued,--Hearing of the exit of Dhritarashtra from this world, the high-souled Pandavas all gave way to great grief.
All the rulers of the earth, O monarch, that are either equal to thee or superior, will then seek alliance with thee.
Sanjaya said, When the troops of both armies were engaged in battle, according to their respective divisions, thy son Duryodhana, O king, riding on another car and filled with rage like a snake of virulent poison, beholding king Yudhishthira the just, quickly addressed his own driver, O Bharata, saying, Proceed, proceed, quickly take me there, O driver, where the royal son of Pandu, clad in mail shineth under yon umbrella held over his head.
Vaisampayana continued, Then, O Bharata, having consulted thus with each other, Partha and Govinda, with Yudhishthiras leave, set out, surrounded by friends.
Many years passed away, O perpetuator of Kurus race, during which that damsel continually observed those diverse vows exceedingly difficult of being practised by women.
Brave heroes fighting in battle with brave Kshatriyas equal to them in might and prowess, obtain great good, O son of Radha.
O sire, O king, I make no distinction between thee and then (but love all of you equally).
By this means, O queen, thy son provoked deadly hostilities with us.
Be thou quick, O Agni, to encompass the object of thy desire, my sisters-in-law are awaiting me.
Do thou, O puissant Rishi, show me favour.
If that be done, the world will not then behold us bereft of sons and wives, deprived of happiness in consequence of the loss of kingdom, and sunk, O son of Pandu, in an unfathomable hell of great misery.
Dhritarashtra said, Come, O Sanjaya, tell me with the fullest details all that hath happened in the encampment of the Kuru and the Pandava troops.
And, O mighty monarch, when Bhishma had left, that lord of men, Dhritarashtras son came there again, and began to consult with his counsellors, What is it that is good for me?
Sahadeva said, When these hostile divisions, terrible and numerous, are here with whom we are to fight, whither dost thou go, O king, in the direction of our foes?
Thou art the absolute lord, O Brahmana, of what ever wealth the Kurus have and of their sovereignty and kingdom!
O Krishna, pardon me if thou pleasest, or pardon me not.
Marutta said, Do thou look with kindness upon me, I bow unto thee, O Indra, by thy presence, my sacrifice has been perfected, and my life too blessed with good results.
O thou that art possessed of great wisdom, tell me now everything in detail truly.
Then, O tiger among kings, those nurses of the Dasarnakas country were filled with great grief and sent emissaries unto their king.
Narada said, The virtuous son of Angira, Samvarta by name is wandering over all the quarters of the earth in a naked state to the wonder of all creatures; do thou, O prince, go to him.
The world also, O beautiful princess, will then think that what we do can never be unholy.
Let all this, O Brahmana, be narrated by thee in the presence of these regenerate sages.
Samvarta said, O king, the feat in thy mind from this terrible thunderbolt will leave thee presently.
Therefore, O prince of the Kuru race, dispelling all anxieties from thy heart, achieve what thou wilt, always acting according to thy energy.
Do not, therefore, give way to wrath, O bull among men!
The Sanjaya said, When three-fourths of that night had worn away, the battle, O king, once more commenced between the Kurus and the Pandavas.
The faces of some were very long, O Bharata.
Thou hast been born, O mighty-armed one, for the destruction of the Panchalas.
Do thou also, O blessed one, duly act according to the words of Brahma as declared by me, O thou of pure soul.
And, O son of Kunti, smiter of all foes, thou shalt also slay all the portions of celestials and Danavas and the Rakshasas that have been incarnate on earth.
And seeing that mole, O Bharata, Sunanda and the queen-mother began to weep, and embracing Damayanti stood silent for a while.
For, O pious man, one belonging to this world whose days have run out can never come back to life.
O king, saying this the queen, taking the permission of Bhishma also, went to the forest.
His subjects, bowing unto him, said, Thou shouldst not go away, O thou of great wisdom, but do thou protect us from a great fear!
It was explained (to us) by Vyasa of mighty energy, celestial vision and great prowess, that ancient ascetic, O Kauravya, who is the son of Parasara and who always observes high vows, who is of immeasurable understanding, who is omniscient, and who, therefore knows the end attached to all acts.
Dhritarashtra asked,--Tell me, O Vidura, why is it that the Pandavas are leaving Hastinapore in such varied guise.
6,000 cars, 6,000 elephants, 10,000 horses, and one million of foot, O Bharata, were all that composed the remnant of the Pandava force in the battle.
I shall, O Madhava, slay all the warriors today!
Conversant with vows, the auspicious and sweet-speeched damsel addressed him, saying, O adorable one, O tiger among ascetics, tell me thy commands, O lord!
O lord, accord not thy approbation to the counsels of the wicked ones of immature years.
O intelligent one, if a child born of a good race studieth the Vedas and beareth himself virtuously, royal sages of virtuous behaviour regard him as an aged sage (not withstanding his years)!
The Pandavas said, How, O Brahmana, did the birth of Dhrishtadyumna the son of Drupada, take place from the (sacrificial) fire?
Formerly, when we were about to set out of Hastinapore for the woods, O thou of agreeable features, it was thou who, reciting to us the story of Vidulas instructions to her son, excited us to exertion.
O child, remember not the harsh words of Duryodhana.
O snake, I shall revive it, though bit by thee.
Vivinsati then, O monarch, suddenly deprived Bhimasena of his steeds and standard and bow.
Sanjaya said, Loud wails arose among thy coops, O Bharata, after the slaughter of Bhurisravas and the ruler of the Sindhus.
When I heard that the wicked wretch Duhsasana, was striving to strip her of that single garment, had only drawn from her person a large heap of cloth without being able to arrive at its end, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success.
There a talk arose, O monarch, regarding this Dhritarashtra and those highly austere penances which he is performing.
Meanwhile, having alighted from his car, O Bharata, Prativindhya hurled at Citra a dart, well-adorned and equipped with a golden staff.
The forces of the Pandavas also, O Duryodhana, have all been slain by thee!
Today, O slayer of Madhu, thou shalt, after Karnas fall, hear those sweet words, By good luck, O thou of Vrishnis race, victory hath been thine!
It behoveth thee, O knower of truth and the first of all intelligent men, to tell me everything.
Invincible in battle, that Satyaki, who hath no warrior amongst the Kauravas equal to him, is coming to thee, O son of Kunti!
How also, O Sanjaya, when everything was enveloped in darkness, did the Pandava troops as also mine once more became visible?
Those highly blessed ones, arriving at that frightful tirtha, saw the water of the Sarasvati mixed with blood and that innumerable Rakshasas, O monarch, were drinking it.
O Brahmana, persons conversant with morals have said that for women that have borne children, to predecease their lords is an act of the highest merit.
Sanjaya said, Thou hast, O king, in consequence of thy own fault, been overtaken by this calamity.
The words that I shall speak, will, O Janamejaya, be conducive to thy pleasure.
Seeing that impenetrable array formed by Bhishma and regarding it as really impenetrable, the king became pale and addressed Arjuna, saying,--O, mighty-armed Dhananjaya, how shall we be able to fight in battle with the Dhartarashtras who have the Grandsire for their (chief) combatant?
And soon the prince of Panchala afflicted his foe with five and twenty arrows, and then slew his steeds, O king, and then both the protectors of his wings.
Loud sounds of wailing were uttered by the Pancalas, O thou of great intelligence, while they were being thus smitten by the Sutas son, that rescuer of friends, for the sake of his friends.
O, save us with a little exertion from the impending conflagration.
It is improper in thee especially, O son.
O Bhishma, what is there remarkable in this ones having supported for a week the Govardhan mount which is like an anthill?
Thus have we told thee, O king, all that we have seen and heard.
Shalya said, O son of Gandhari, when thou, O giver of honours, describest me before thy troops to be superior to the son of Devaki, I am exceedingly gratified with thee.
How then, O foremost of men, couldst thou wish, like an ordinary person, to slay thy eldest brother, the King, who is conversant with morality?
Vasudeva said, I am the preceptor, O mighty-armed one, and know that the mind is my pupil.
Yudhishthira said, When such a fate overtook that high-souled monarch who was engaged in austere penances, notwithstanding the fact of his having such kinsmen as ourselves all alive, it seems to me, O regenerate one, that the end of human beings is difficult to guess.
Beholding that illustrious lady with her daughter-in-law, Gandhari addressed her, saying, ‘Do not, O daughter, grieve so.
But O fair girl, thou wert born in a respectable family.
Sauti said, And Sringin then replied to his father, saying, Whether this be an act of rashness, O father, or an improper act that I have done, whether thou likest it or dislikest it, the words spoken by me shall never be in vain.
Hearing these words of Sutas son that were suitable to his disposition, Duryodhana, O king, with all his followers became filled with joy.
I know thy puissance, O Krishna.
The ruler of the Abhisars (in return), striking Srutakarman, O king, with nine straight arrows, pierced his driver with five.
O listen to me why my affection for them now is even greater!
But that Brahmana, O Purandara, giving way to passion, was able by the power of his devotions to seize and hold fast by hand with thy thunder-bolt in it.
That vast host of thine, O ruler of men, thus slaughtered, swooned away on the field, like a woman under the influence of liquor.
O monarch of the Bharata race, that great son of Diti then recited unto the sons of Pandu the history of the Danava Vrisha-parva, and that foremost of artists then, having rested awhile, set himself after much thoughtful planning to build a palace for the illustrious sons of Pandu.
O foremost of Brahmanas, avarice and lust I have none, and neither fear nor pride nor vanity.
Vaisampayana continued, Thus questioned, O monarch, by those bulls among men, the Brahmana narrated all the particulars about the birth of Draupadi.
O thou that ownest red steeds, do that by which the ruler of the Sindhus may yet be saved.
deeply in the very vitals, O king, by the son of Pandu, the beast suddenly fell down on the Earth like a mountain summit loosened by a thunder-bolt.
3 Sanjaya said, Hearing these words of Kripa that were auspicious and fraught with morality and profit, Ashvatthama, O monarch, became overwhelmed with sorrow and grief.
Thou, O Bharata, art strong in words and very unfeeling.
Do thou now, O blessed damsel, boil these five jujubes, O thou of excellent vows!
Thus addressed by the illustrious son of Pandu, the chief of the Gandharvas, O Karna, disclosed unto the Pandavas the object we had in view in proceeding to that place, viz., that we came there for casting our eyes on the sons of Pandu with their wife, all plunged in misery.
Proceed quickly thither, O king, and thou wilt then see the Kuru monarch!
Therefore, O daughter-in-law, I shall take thy share of the barley.
And she said, O foremost of speakers, created by thee how shall I, being a female, do such a cruel and evil act knowing it to be cruel and evil?
If, however, Arjuna of white steeds can, by any means, be withdrawn (from Yudhishthiras side), then Yudhishthira, O king, shall soon come under thy control.
Behold, O driver, this vast host that is pursued by the Pandavas.
And having purified thyself, direct thy course towards other holy spots, Vaisampayana said, Then, O Janamejaya, the son of Pandu started from the river Kausiki and repaired in succession to all the sacred shrines.
The Pancala prince Mitravarman, O Bharata, those two foremost of bowmen, have been despatched to Yamas abode by Drona.
Thus addressed by him, Viratas son, O king, guided Savyasachins car with great alacrity towards the spot where Kripa stood anxious to fight.
Death is certainly disliked by all creatures, O Bharata!
The Somakas then loudly shouted to Partha, saying, Be quick, O Arjuna, go and pierce Karna.
And, O king, from the tribe of Asuras called Krodhavasa, of whom I have already spoken to thee, were born many heroic kings on earth.
O best of men, the son, who is but a form of ones own seed, rescueth (ancestors) from the region of Yama.
Meanwhile, Bhima, beholding Karna approach, became filled with rage, and set his heart on the destruction of Karna, O bull of Bharatas race.
Accept me, O lady of propitious looks, who am devoted to thee.
Happy are those Kshatriyas, O Karna, that obtain such a battle.
Sanjaya said, Listen to me, O monarch, as I describe to thee what happened.
Be happy, O king, after I shall have laid low this wretch with my mace!
Thou art, O father, one acquainted with the acts and sayings of great beings.
Welcome art thou, O Dhananjaya.
Gandhari said, Thou covetous wretch that disregardest the commands of the aged, abandoning thy father and myself and giving up prosperity and life, enhancing the joy of thy foes, and afflicting me with deep distress, thou wilt, O fool, remember thy fathers words, when struck by Bhimasena, thou wilt bite the dust.
Filling the welkin with his shafts that resembled dense flights of feathery creatures, Dhananjaya, O monarch, at that time, became the very Destroyer unto the Kurus.
All this is due to thy power, O thou of Vrishnis race!
Hell, O son, should without doubt be beheld by every king.
Bhima at this once more said,--Wretch darest thou, O Dussasana, use harsh words as these?
I will rout all thy foes in battle, O great warrior, And, O thou of mighty arms, be at thy ease.
And terrific was the collision that took place between the few and many, between the Chedis (on the one side) and the Kalingas and the Nishadas, O king, (on the other).
In thy very sight, O hero, thy grandson, who had been slain by Ashvatthama, was revived through his energy.
He, O Partha, is the worst of men who committeth acts that should not be done and doeth acts that are apparently proper but condemned by the scriptures.
The steeds of Duryodhanas car, deprived of their driver, ran wildly on all sides, O Bharata, dragging the car after them, at which loud wails arose (in the Kuru army).
Even as a person that climbs up a tree for compassing his own destruction, even as the crab conceives for her own ruin, I may, O thou of sweet smiles, bring destruction upon myself by harbouring thee.
These and other kings, O son of Pandu, who had warred on thy side now walk with the Gandharvas or Yakshas or other sacred beings.
They, O Bharata, who upon being angry endanger ones possessions and means of acquisition, should always be propitiated like the very gods.
Having resolved thus in his mind, Vahuka, with his heart in sorrow, spake unto king Rituparna, with joined hands, saying, O monarch, I bow to thy behest, and, O tiger among men, I will go to the city of the Vidarbhas in a single day.
The son of Kunti, meanwhile, O king, urged Sikhandin, saying,--Proceed, proceed, towards Bhishma, and slay him!--Then, O elder brother of Pandu, the ruler of Pragjyotishas, abandoning that son of Pandu, quickly proceeded, O king, against the car of Drupada.
Then Vasudeva, smiling, said unto the son of Pandu, What would have been thy condition, O Partha, if, observant of virtue thou hadst slain the son of Dharma with thy sharp sword?
I do not like that thou, O Krishna, shouldst proceed into their midst, If any mischief be done to thee, O Madhava, Jett alone happiness; nothing, not even divinity, nor even the sovereignty over all the gods will delight us.
O Karna, thou challengest Dhananjaya, the son of Pritha, to battle even like a calf challenging a smiting bull of keen horns and neck thick as a drum.
Sanjaya continued, Thus addressed, the son of Drona replied unto the king, who was invincible in battle, saying, Arise, O king, blessed be thou, we shall yet vanquish the foe!
Then that terrible and mighty division of the Kalingas, O ruler of men, rushed against Bhima at the command of thy son.
O bull of the Bharata race, happiness should ever be enjoyed with ones relatives, and not without them, to eat with one another, to talk with one another, and to love one another, are what relatives should always do.
Similarly, O king, elephants, encompassing individual car-warriors excited with wrath and scattering showers of shafts, despatched them to the other world.
O son of the Kuru race, many times did king Gaya perform sacrifices of this description, here, by the side of this Brahmasara!
O king of kings!
Reflecting for a while in the presence of those gods among men, Jayadratha, in fear of Abhimanyus father and covered with shame, said these words--He who in Pandus soil was begotten by Sanjaya continued,--Having said these words unto Hrishikesa, the son of Vasudeva, having himself said so unto his own self, Arjuna in a deep voice, once more addressed lord Kesava, saying--Thou shouldst O Krishna, so act that my car may be well equipt as soon as this night dawns, since grave is the task that is at hand!
It is not curries only of which I have knowledge, O monarch, although king Yudhishthira always used in days gone by to taste my dishes.
Thou, O lord, art superior to all the gods.
And, O most excellent of the sacerdotal caste, be it known to thee that the intending bridegroom must offer a dowry consisting of a thousand fleet steeds, whose colour must be brown and every one of whom must possess a single sable car.
O sire, how could those virtuous, honest, and superior kinsmen of thine (otherwise) engage in such a wicked act with the deceitful Sakuni?
Thou rememberest, O queen, those words that thou spokest in the assembly in my presence, those words fraught with righteousness and that were beneficial to both parties, which thy sons, O auspicious lady, did not obey!
I think, O lord of Earth, that all this that has come upon thee is due to destiny.
Although she spoke in this strain, Salwa, however, O chief of the Bharatas, rejected that daughter of the ruler of Kasi, like a snake casting off his slough.
Vaisampayana continued,--Hearing these words of Bhishma, the king of Chedi could bear no more, He then replied in rage unto Bhishma in these words.-- Let our foes, O Bhishma, be endued with that prowess which this Kesava hath, whom thou like a professional chanter of hymns praisest, rising repeatedly from thy seat.
O monarch, O best of men, having thyself drunk the fiercest and the most indigestible poison, take thou all its consequences now.
And, O thou of excellent vows, come and behold thy parents!
O thou possessed of the wealth of asceticism, do tell me all this!
Therefore, O thou of exalted soul, tell me all about it truly.
Affectionate unto one another, they all repeatedly exclaimed, What is our joy today, O what joy!
Then seventeen hundred Kekaya troops, skilled in smiting, united with a body of the Pancala troops, O king, checked the Dhartarashtras.
Thus addressed, Shakra, at these words of Brahma, O Janamejaya, performed in that abode of Sarasvati diverse sacrifices.
Therefore, O foremost of Kurus, grieve not for all (that hath occurred), O bull of the Bharata race!
Rising up in the morning, he took leave of all the ascetics, and having touched the sacred water, O Bharata, set out quickly for other tirthas.
Thyself addressing the princess Draupadi, that lady whose tread is as dignified as that of the elephant, in these words, viz., The Pandavas, O Krishna, are lost.
For, O son of Pandu, thou art even as king Bhagiratha, or Gaya, or Yayati, or any one, O son of Kunti, that is like them.
And, O king, Yajnaseni, without having eaten herself, daily seeth whether everybody, including even the deformed and the dwarfs, hath eaten or not.
All thy wishes, O son of Pandu, have been fulfilled!
Yudhishthira said, Let arrangements be made by thee, O regenerate one, about loosening this horse for enabling it to wander over the Earth at its will.
There was no fear of thieves, O dear one, no fear of famine, no fear off disease.
O gentle one, I have been sent by the foremost of the celestials even for this object.
Dhritarashtra said, Tell me, O Sanjaya, what the valiant Bhishma, excited with rage, did in battle, upon beholding my host afflicted by the Parthas.
I do not, O Dhananjaya, behold anyone here with whom thou hast to fight!
The seas, those habitation of Makaras, swelled O king, in agitation.
O sire, follow those counsels, and do not yield to the influence of wrath.
O wicked one, reap now the consequence of that act of deception I will now slay thee with all thy relatives and advisers!
The whole Earth with her mountains and forest and islands, without a heroic warrior (to oppose thy wish), will, O king, become thine today, over which thyself with thy sons and grandsons will reign supreme.
O Bhima, I have for long cherished this thought in my mind,--that protected by the might of thy arms, I shall see that summit.
And, O bull of the Bharata race, just as Krishna was on the point of setting out, the Pandavas with Yudhishthira at their head walked round that tiger among men who was never fatigued with exertion.
O father, we should now act every day in such a way as to weaken (the strength of) the Pandavas.
Be my wife, O beautiful one!
Do thou, however, instructed by me, say unto the king, O foremost one of Bharatas race, that he may take from my house whatever articles he wishes and in whatever measure also he likes.
Fight with thy equals, O son of Madri!
By thee, O Acyuta, we have today been rescued from a great calamity.
And reflecting on Ramas virtues, the powerful and mighty king cheerfully addressed the family priest, saying, Blessed be thou, O Brahmana!
The mind said, These arrows, O Alarka, will never pierce me through.
I cannot live without service, and, O king, I do not like to enter into the service of anyone else save thee.
All persons, O chief of the Bhojas, joyfully begin to act, even in respect of enterprises that lead to death, in the belief that those enterprises are achievable by them.
said, O Dhritarashtra, O thou of the Bharata race, that ancient and immortal Rishi Sanat-sujata who, leading a life perpetual celibacy, hath said that there is no Death,--that foremost of all intelligent persons,--will expound to thee all the doubts, in thy mind, both expressed and unexpressed.
If thou strivest, O Janardana, such is this act that it will be soon effected.
Dhritarashtra said, The preceptors son, O Sanjaya, is possessed of might and worthy of respect.
O thou that draggest the dead bodies of thy foes!
And, O royal Yudhishthira, mercy and self control, and truth and universal sympathy, and everything wonderful in this world, are to be found in thee.
Possessed of great strength, some amongst them partook of the nature of Yama, some of Rudra, some of Soma, some of Kuvera, some of Varuna, some of Indra, and some of Agni, O scorcher of foes.
O slayer of Madhu, sporting there in the company of friends, we will, O Janardana, return in the evening.
Indeed, O bull of Bharatas race, inspired with desire of victory, they looked like two infuriated elephants.
The beautiful standard of Bhimasena, adorned with many bells, fell down, O giver of honours.
And she beheld the divine Brahman--the Creator of the worlds who knoweth no deterioration--surrounded by the gods, Brahmanas, Vaisampayana continued, Having said so unto the Earth, O king, the divine Brahman bade her farewell.
Hearing these words of Bhima, Draupadi said, In order that, O lord, Vaisampayana continued, It was thus, O Bharata, that a hundred and five of those Kichakas were slain.
Vaisampayana continued, Having prevented Partha the immortals with others that had come there, went to each his place, O foremost of men.
It behoveth thee not to commit sin, O thou irrepressible one, deprived though thou hast been of thy senses by (the Rishis) curse.
Set out for battle, O tiger among men.
When king Yudhishthira the just, conversant with morality, said this, Bhishma the grandsire of the Kurus, spoke these words in reply,--Fear not, O tiger of the Kurus.
Thou, O Krishna, art our refuge, thou art our lord, thou art our guide!
I desire to hear all this, O foremost of regenerate ones!
Eight Vasus, O chief of Bharata’s race, are now seen.
After this, O Bharata, those heroes heard the tidings of that highly wonderful and marvellous and glad-some birth of thy father.
And, O daughter-in-law, as I rejoice today beholding thee attired in red silk, so shall I rejoice again, when, O accomplished one, I behold thee become the mother of a son!
Vaisampayana said, With the permission of the Kuru king, the Pandavas, O monarch, with their troops and the ladies of their household, supported themselves on diverse kinds of food and drink and passed about a month in great happiness in that forest.
The Kauravas, then, O Bharata, beholding the battle become frightful, broke and fled wailing towards the Pandavas.
Cutting off the bow of Satyaki, as also his standard, O bull of Bharatas race, Karna pierced Satyaki himself with nine shafts in the centre of the chest.
The warriors uttered leonine roars, O bull of Bharatas race, and shouted loudly.
In consequence, however, of morality being afflicted by Bhimasena, this harmony of which I have spoken hath been disturbed, whatever, O Govinda, thou mayst tell me!
Who else, save thyself, O Vrikodara, could slay the heroic Duryodhana while careering in diverse kinds of motion and performing all the wheeling manoeuvres (characteristic of such encounters)?
Those kings, O mighty-armed hero, who will come forward to encounter thee, try, O sinless one, to avoid battles with them to the best of thy power.
Just at that time, however, the island-born (Vyasa), O monarch, came there in course of his wanderings.
O bull of Bharatas race, the faults which thou, O monarch, hadst seen in that unrighteous course of conduct (towards the Pandavas), were not seen by Duryodhana.
O slayer of Madhu, we who have been afflicted with fear, have thee for our refuge.
These and other foremost of men, O monarch, all inspired with desire of victory, began to grind that great bowman, viz., the Sutas son, in that dreadful battle.
After this, while the troops (of both sides) were being mustered and arrayed, the high-souled son of Rohini, that foremost of all persons endued with might, addressed his brother Krishna, saying, O mighty-armed one, O slayer of Madhu, let us render assistance to the Kurus!
This I apprehend, O king, from this match at dice.
I can annihilate the Pandava army, O blessed monarch, taking every morning ten thousand (ordinary) warriors and one thousand car-warriors as my share from day to day.
And because, O king, that spot is the beautiful sporting ground of those Apsaras, therefore is that tirtha on the excellent bank of the Sarasvati called Subhumika.
O listen to it then in full!
With another razor-headed arrow, O lord, whetted on stone, that celebrated hero, smiling the while, cut off his antagonists head adorned with bright gold.
Indeed, O king, the mighty-armed Karna in that battle, burning the vast host of the Pandavas, stood there like a blazing fire without smoke.
O blessed lady, there are numerous discomforts and difficulties attaching to a life in a (woody) retreat, none of which, O thou of the fairest complexion, shalt thou have to bear in thy fathers abode!
O thou of Dasarhas race, let it be as that (celestial) voice said.
With a razor-headed arrow of great sharpness, Shakuni then, O king, cut off that bright scimitar of his adversary as the latter careered in circles before him.
33 34 Duryodhana said, After the fears of those throngs of the pitris, the gods, and the Rishis had thus been dispelled by that high-souled Deity, Brahman then offered his adorations, unto Sankara, and said these words for the benefit of the universe, Through thy favour, O Lord of all, the Lordship of all creatures is mine.
O Bharata, his wrath excited, that best of the Kurus smote numberless ones amongst them, whereupon from fear, they are surrendered to this Devavrata seeking his protection.
Duryodhana said, Behold, O Radhas son, the Panchalas broken by that firm bowman (Drona) with his shafts, like a herd of the wild deer frightened by a lion.
When, O Kuntis son, the far-sighted Vidura said this, fool that I was I followed the wicked Duryodhana.
By that I will dispel my grief and fever, O Janardana.
The courtesan said, I hope, O saint!
And, O Pandava, divided thy prosperity with thy adherents, behave truthfully towards them, and converse with them agreeably!
Therefore, O tiger among men, accomplish by your own acts that which destiny pointeth at.
Divested of his armour, thy son, O king, looked exceedingly beautiful, like a snake, O monarch, having cast off his slough at the proper season.
The, eastern horizon of (Duryodhanas encampment) appeareth red; the southern of the hue of weapons; and western, O slayer of Madhu, of an earthy hue.
Vasudeva said, Thou, O son of Gandhari, hast been slain with thy brothers, sons, kinsmen, friends, and followers, only in consequence of the sinful path in which thou hast trod!
If this one threw drown by a kick an inanimate piece of wood, viz., a car, what is there, O Bhishma, wonderful in that?
That mace, O sire, slew numberless steeds and riders.
There is no doubt in this, since thou, O slayer of Madhu, that art the master of all the worlds, art pleased with me.
The setting of snakes at us while we were asleep, the giving of poison to us while we ate, the casting of our body into the water at Pramanakoti, the attempt to burn us at the house of lac, the insult offered us at the assembly, the robbing us of all our possessions, the whole year of our living in concealment, our exile into the woods, O sinless one, of all these woes, O best of Bharatas race, I shall today reach the end, O bull of Bharatas line!
Indeed, O monarch, thy son Suyodhana said unto Karna, O son of Vikartana, that time of battle hath come at last.
These huge elephants, again, O Visoka, are uttering loud cries, assailed with shafts.
Vaisampayana said, Do thou listen to me, O king, as I discourse to thee duly, O Bharata, on the excellent ordinances relating to sacrifice and the fruits also, O ruler of men, that sacrifice yields.
Nor is anything to be seen here, O Arjuna, that may be conquered by thee.
I beseech thee, O king, do not command me any further.
If without sacrificing the interests of the Pandavas I can bring about peace among the Kurus, my conduct will be regarded as highly meritorious, O high-souled one, and the Kauravas themselves will be liberated from the meshes of death.
O sinless one, ye will have on earth to pass the thirteenth year (of your exile), unknown to all.
O blessed lady, hearing from thee first, I will settle how to act.
Thus shrouded, O king, along with his car, Dhrishtadyumna became invisible, like the Sun shrouded by rain-charged clouds.
When we found that death could not, by any means, overtake us all, it was then, O child, that we regarded this as the best means (of compassing our desire).
The Earth, O Bharata, covered with blood, looked beautiful like a vast plain in the season of rains covered with the red coccinella.
O thou of great good fortune, whatever thou demandest of me, O foremost of eloquent men, I will confer on thee, however difficult it may be for me!
O fair lady, my men shall search for thy husband.
Let this daughter of a king, O tiger among men, be charged with the duties of her sex!
Know this for the truth, O king.
Behold, O Govinda, the shields decked with hundred moons, the standards of solar effulgence, the golden coats of mail, and the collars and cuirasses made of gold, and the head-gears, of my sons, scattered on the earth, are blazing with splendour like sacrificial fires over which have been poured libations, of clarified butter.
And, O protector of men, he came to the sea where the river Ganga falls into it; and there in the centre of five hundred rivers, he performed the holy ceremony of a plunge.
Saddened at hearing this, the goddess said to Vrihaspati, Protect me, O Brahmana, from this Nahusha.
Questioned by me, O thou of great wisdom, tell me all this!
Struck by the ruler of the Madras with his mace, the mace of Bhima, O king, produced sparks of fire in the welkin which thereupon seemed to be ablaze.
Sanjaya said,--O king, hundreds and thousands of bulls among Kshatriyas, all brave and mighty car-warriors, placing the generalissimo Sweta in the van, and displaying their strength.
But thou, O Krishna, art above such motives.
How also did Devapi, O Brahmana, and how Vishvamitra, O best of men, acquire the same status?
In covering, O Brahmana, the three worlds with three steps in the sacrifice of Vali (the Asura king), Vishnu had covered this whole northern region; and, accordingly, there is a spot here called Vishnupada.
This my host, therefore, O king, the greater portion of which has been slaughtered, has been reduced to this state by the Parthas who were at first fewer than us.
Repairing to the shade of that tree, those great car-warriors, O king, those foremost of men, saw that was the biggest tree in that forest.
The two protectors of Karnas car wheels, viz., his two invincible sons, O sire, that were named Sushena and Satyasena, began to fight, reckless of their very lives.
Whatever wealth we have, thou mayst give away as thou likest, O ruler of Earth.
And, O bull among the Bharatas, that force of Virata, O king, as it marched forth marking the footprints of the cattle looked exceedingly beautiful.
Then, O Bharata, possessed of great energy, Bhima, smiling in derision, caught with his left hand the tree hurled at him by the Rakshasa in wrath.
Come to our side, O son of Radha, and (stay with us) as long as Bhishma is not slain.
Dhritarashtra said, After the fall of the mighty bowmen Bhishma and Drona and the great car-warrior Karna, and after both the Kurus and the Pandavas had been reduced in numbers, and when, indeed, the Parthas, possessed of great prowess, became once more angry in battle, what, O Sanjaya, was the strength of each of the armies?
And those slender-waisted ladies vied with one another, O king, in gratifying the Rishi.
Then Satya, the daughter of Satrajit, and Rukmini too, O king, fell down beside Dhananjaya and uttered loud wails of grief.
O thou of agreeable smiles, the Rakshasa could not know thee as my wile.
Thus, O king, was the territory of Ahicchatra full of towns and cities, obtained by Arjuna, and bestowed upon Drona.
O monarch, the king who is the lord paramount of all kings, and in whom alone the dominion of the universe is centered, properly deserves to be called an emperor.
Without doubt, thou, O bull amongst men, has routed the foe and snatched away from them my wealth of kine, like his prey from a tiger.
adored, O king, by great Rishis.
Verily, they must have in their (last nights) dreams seen signs of approaching evil, O Mahadeva!
It was for this, O queen, that I did that act.
And at these words of his daughter, O monarch, the king gave away Lopamudra unto the illustrious Agastya with due rites.
Sanjaya continued, Thus pacified by the king, the high-souled son of Drona, O monarch, whose ire had been excited, suppressed his wrath and forgave (Karna).
Today I shall recover, O sinless one, thy wreath of glory!
The Kuru grandsire, the mighty-armed Bhishma, then addressed them, saying, Welcome art thou, O thou of Vrishnis race.
Therefore, O Brahmana, go ye back whithersoever ye list!
Karna, otherwise called Vaikartana, O king, shooting dense showers of arrows, checked, single-handed, all those mighty bowmen thus advancing (to the rescue).
(Then were born) Airavata, Takshaka, Karkotaka, Dhananjaya, Kalakeya, the serpent Mani, Purana, Pinjaraka, and Elapatra, Vamana, Nila, Anila, Kalmasha, Savala, Aryaka, Ugra, Kalasapotaka, Suramukha, Dadhimukha, Vimalapindaka, Apta, Karotaka, Samkha, Valisikha, Nisthanaka, Hemaguha, Nahusha, Pingala, Vahyakarna, Hastipada, Mudgarapindaka, Kamvala Aswatara, Kaliyaka, Vritta, Samvartaka, Padma, Mahapadma, Sankhamukha, Kushmandaka, Kshemaka, Pindaraka, Karavira, Pushpadanshtraka, Vilwaka, Thus, O best of regenerate ones, have I said the names of the principal serpents.
On the forenoon of that day, O king, great was the carnage that ensued, resembling what occurred in the battle between the gods and The mighty Dhrishtaketu, excited with wrath, speedily pierced the son of Somadatta, O king, with ninety shafts in the chest.
O hero, without thee, my heart never feeleth any delight.
Sanjaya said, In that afternoon, O monarch, the Sutas son of great valour began to smite all the Somakas in the very sight of Bhimasena.
What are their (respective) natures, O holy one?
O princess, I never act, solicitous of the fruits of my actions.
O bull of the Bharata race, the Pandavas ever abide by the truth.
Afflicting with vigour all the Pandava warriors with his shafts from every side, O sire, Shalya shrouded king Yudhishthira the just and roared repeatedly like a lion.
Having said this, O best of men, Mahadeva, O sinless king, pressed his thumb by the tip of his own finger.
O mighty-armed one, O lord of the universe!
O virtuous one, I will in thy presence, offer worship unto that illustrious scion of Dasarhas race.
Bear thyself thus, O son of Kunti, towards king Yudhishthira, the just.
The mighty bowmen amongst the Pandavas, those chastisers of foes, dividing themselves, O monarch, into three bodies, rushed against thy troops.
O ascetic, I well knew the power of his penances; therefore with an agitated heart, I addressed him thus, bending low with joined hands, Friend, I did this by way of a joke, to excite thy laughter.
His words were, O prince Ajatsatru, (if vanquished), thou shalt have with all thy brothers, to dwell, to the knowledge of all men, for twelve years in the forest of thy choice, passing the thirteenth year in secrecy.
Upon the commencement of that fierce sacrifice according to due rites, the kingdom of Dhritarashtra, O monarch, began to waste away.
Beholding Duryodhana, the mighty son of Dhritarashtra, struck down by Bhimasena in contravention of the rules of fair fight, in fact, beholding the Kuru king slain unfairly, O Bharata, Yudhishthira, O monarch, became filled with great fear, at the thought of the highly blessed Gandhari possessed of ascetic merit.
And, O Bharata, in accordance with words of king Yudhishthira of great wisdom, the encounter that took place was a skirmish.
And it was thus, O best of the Bharatas, that combat took place.
And, O mighty-armed one, slay thy foes, having recourse to stratagem.
O king, O mighty monarch, we are all eager to behold Savyasachin, and therefore, will we all go together.
And, O bull of Bharatas race, fierce was the collision that took place when the serried ranks arrayed for battle encountered each other.
O irresistible one, thou, O son, wert brought forth by me in my fathers abode, decked with (natural) ear-rings and accoutred in a (natural) coat of mail, and blazing forth in beauty.
So also, O god of gods, let him who observes a fast here and resides for three nights after having cleansed himself, obtain the fruit of a twelve years fast!
Vivinsa, O king, had five and ten sons; all of them were powerful archers, reverencial to the Brahmanas and truthful, gentle and ever speaking fair.
O sinless one, do thou tell me this.
Today, O Krishna, our task will be ended!
The gratification of ones father and ones mother, who is the sole displayer of affection (for her child), hath, O son, in the matter of ascertaining the duties of men, been declared to be the highest of all duties.
O lord of the celestials, O demolisher of hostile towns!
Rallying his host, O king, Shalya stood fearlessly in battle, uttering loud leonine roars and causing his bow to twang fiercely.
Janamejaya said, O thou of ascetic wealth!
Yudhishthira said, I am anxious to hear in detail, O thou foremost of eloquent men, the history of the illustrious Nala.
Then a certain mouse endued with wisdom, named Dindika, said, O king these words unto the large swarm of mice gathered there, Go all of ye to the river-side together.
I must, O king, fight for their sake.
O illustrious one, it shall be even as the slayer of Madhu hath said!
On the other hand, thy death, O sinless one, is enviable.
What for, O Brahamana, wilt thou destroy thyself?
Let me ask thee, O foremost of car-warriors, with whom wouldst thou fight using this weapon?
O blessed lady, in sacrificing myself I do not become guilty of self-destruction.
O auspicious dame, there is now no lady like thee in the world!
It is difficult, O twice-born one, for those high-souled ones to acquire virtue who by the duties of their order are obliged to do what is cruel.
Tell me all this, O illustrious one!
O mower of foes, thou shouldst always do what is agreeable to Draupadi.
Seeing his kingdom thus afflicted, the puissant monarch, O king, became very cheerless and thoughtful.
Their worship over, they then, O king, said unto him these words, Witness, O Rama, the skill, in battle, of thy two disciples!
Without doubt, O monarch, Time in this world is mightier than everything else, for we behold even thee struck down by Bhimasena in battle!
And, O king, immediately on seeing that mass of energy, flaming and brilliant as fire, seated with upraised arms, facing the sun, my friend, the graceful lord of the Rakshasas, Maniman, from stupidity, foolishness, hauteur and ignorance discharged his excrement on the crown of that Maharshi.
Be attentive, O king, to thy own protection.
60 Dhritarashtra said, Beholding the (Kuru) king struck down unfairly, what O Suta, did the mighty Baladeva, that foremost one of Yadus race, say?
Marutta said, I desire, O Brahmana, that Indra all on a sudden should come in person at this sacrifice, and accept the oblation offered to him, and that all the other gods also come and take their own shares of the offerings and accept the libations of Soma offered to them.
Sahadeva said, What hath been said by the king is, indeed, eternal virtue, but thou, O chastiser of foes, shouldst act, in such a way that war may certainly happen.
The Pandavas also, O monarch, in that encounter, inspired with desire of victory, proceeded against the ruler of the Madras and pierced him with keen shafts.
O son of the Kuru race, whether independence of these (three), or their possession is the better for those that desire happiness, should be settled by thee after careful thought.
When Bhishma, O monarch, of prowess incapable of being baffled, was slain, thy warriors as also the Pandavas both reflected by themselves (on the situation).
Those elephants, looking like clouds, fell down on the Earth, like mountains riven with thunder, O lord, on the occasion of the dissolution of the world at the end of the Yuga.
Vaisampayana continued,--Hearing these words of the king, the exalted son of Parasara, the island-born Vyasa of dark hue, spoke these words,--For thirteen years, O king, those portents will bear mighty consequences ending in destruction, O king of kings, of all the Kshatriyas.
And, O king, that son of Diti who had been known as Sivi became on earth the famous monarch Druma.
But, O amiable one, there is something else to be said, something else to be reflected upon by thee.
Beholding soldiers struck with fear and flying, the panic spreads in other directions, and soon, O king, the whole army is broken and flies in all directions.
His conduct and his policy, it is seen, point to that line, O lord!
And some, endued with little strength, tortured by thirst, O king, and lying on the field of battle on the bare ground, asked for water.
O Lord of the gods, and my servants are to my liking and I always seek the welfare of the gods, and they cherish me well.
Tell me all this, O fair lady.
There, O Krishna, Shalya, well conversant with holding the reins, looketh exceedingly resplendent as, seated on the terrace of Karnas car, he guideth that vehicle.
Endued with energy and wisdom, and acquainted with the truths of religion and profit, Yudhishthira, that foremost of righteous men, hath, O king of kings, suffered much misery out of kindness and sympathy, in order to preserve thy reputation.
This parva is divided into seventh-eight sections, O best of Brahmanas, of two thousand, five hundred and seven slokas.
And, O king, I said further, It is for thee especially, O mother, that I took this vow; I am verily thy servant and slave, O mother, thou that art distinguished for parental affection.
And, O king, approaching Dhritarashtra, Kshattri said, The Kurus are prospering by good luck!
It is in this, region, O Galava, that the Siddhas, with souls ever under control and always sporting at will, have their fit abodes, abounding with every object of enjoyment.
O Sringin, thy sire engaged in devotion is in the same posture still.
O sire, peace is preferable to war.
Then, O Bharata, thy son, in that dreadful battle, quickly sped four and sixty shafts at the car of Sahadeva.
Seeing him plunged into sorrow (on account of the maiden) I said unto him,--O Brahmana, I cannot, by any means, bestow this girl on my brother.
Another incident has happened that is more painful than this, O thou that art possessed of wealth of penances.
Arjuna said, My victory, O Krishna, is, certain.
Then Karna, O monarch, burnt the hostile army like a mighty and blazing conflagration consuming a heap of dry grass in the summer season.
Another ruler of a maritime country, viz., Nila, and Vyaghradatta of great energy, have both, O king, been despatched to Yamas abode by Ashvatthama.
Many thousands of mighty car-warriors belonging to thy army, as also elephants, O king, and steeds well harnessed, proceeded for battle, with the grandsire in the van.
Anon that disappeared and everything became clear when the Earth, O best of the Bharatas, became drenched with the blood of heroes.
How couldst thou, O child, encounter that Bhishma who hath no equal in the whole world of men?
Once again, O monarch, the valiant Sahadeva sped at Shakuni an irresistible shower of arrows.
Far better it were, O Bhima, that I should die before thee.
Thus addressed by Krishna, King Yudhishthira the just, with hair standing on end, O monarch, said these words unto Janardana: Sanjaya continued, After this conversation, those heroes entered thy encampment and obtained the military chest, many jewels, and much wealth.
And that bull among men also took up, O king, crescents made of gold.
O thou of sweet smiles, O thou that possessest a faultless form, he that will behold thee constantly, will surely catch the flame.
Then, O bull of Bharatas race, beholding Srutayush at the head of Kalinga troops, Bhimasena rushed at him.
Except when addrest for death O king, having abandoned my arms and withdrawn (in Yoga meditation) from surrounding sights, none will be able to slay me.
And O monarch, that lord of men exhorted by the worshipful Viswarasraba himself, and by Dwaipayana (Vyasa), Krishna Devasthana, Narada, Bhima, Nakula, Krishna (Draupadi), Sahadeva, and the sharpwitted Vijaya, as well as by other great men, and Brahmanas versed in the Sastras, became relieved of all mental affliction and sorrow arising from the death of his dear relations.
Duryodhana replied,--O uncle, beholding this whole earth owning the sway of Yudhishthira in consequence of the might of the illustrious Arjunas weapons and beholding also that sacrifice of the son of Pritha like unto the sacrifice of Sakra himself of great glory among the celestials, I, being filled with jealousy and burning day and night, am being dried up like a shallow tank in the summer season.
Then Dhananjaya, O king, penetrated into the midst of the car-division of the Kauravas, stretching his bow Gandiva celebrated over the three worlds.
And afterwards when that sound had ceased and the air had arisen they (each of them) cautiously came out of their coverts and met together, O descendant of Bharata.
With all my well-wishers, and my younger brothers, I am going to heaven, O thou of unfading glory!
Vaisampayana said, Thus addressed by the Brahmanas, the Pandavas, O Janamejaya, proceeded towards the country of the southern Panchalas ruled over by the king Drupada.
It behave thee, O king, to act in such a way that no dispute may arise between thy children on account of this gambling match.
Indra said, Hath thy journey hither been pleasant, O great saint, I am delighted to see thee.
I have seen many sacred waters, and the sacred stream Ganga also, O king.
I shall, therefore, say, O king, what is for the good of the Kurus.
O wretch!
And that same (king) of a dreaded name was sonless, O descendant of Bharata!
this, Uttara asked his father in a hurry, saying, By whom, O king, hath this one been struck?
Vrihaspati said, O Indra, I have heard that Marutta will perform a great sacrifice at which exquisite presents will be given by him (to Brahmanas) and that at his sacrifice Samvarta will act as the officiating priest, and therefore do I desire that he may not officiate as priest at that sacrifice.
Skilled in battle and endued with great might of arms, Prithas son, O sire, quickly broke that elephant division.
no doubt what thou sayest is true; we accept thy words, O thou of courage that is never weak!
32 Sanjaya said, Thy son then, O monarch, humbly approaching that mighty car-warrior, viz., the ruler of the Madras, addressed him, from affection, in these words, O thou of true vows, O thou of great good fortune, O enhancer of the sorrows of foes, O ruler of the Madras, O hero in battle, O thou that inspirest hostile troops with fear, thou hast heard, O foremost of speakers, how, for the sake of Karna who spoke unto me, I myself am desirous of soliciting thee among all these lions of kings.
O accept this weapon of mine--the mace I wield incapable of being baffled by any body.
O lord, I worship thee to obtain thy grace.
Then Arjuna, O monarch, in shame, touched king Yudhishthiras feet with his head.
Arjuna said, Beholding this gentle human form of thine, O Janardana, I have now become of right mind and have come to my normal state.
That monarch of great energy, inspiring terror in every breast and looking like a second Yama, rising up, addressed Utanka, saying,--By good luck, O best of Brahmanas, thou hast come to me at the sixth hour of the day when I am in search of food.
O thou foremost of Kuru heroes, go back to the city of the Kurus, and let Partha also go away, having conquered the kine.
Whether he, O bull among the Bharatas, (Dhritarashtra) understandeth or not, of his own sense, it is thy duty to tell him plainly.
Auspicious and perfumed breezes also blew there, O monarch!
Then Sanjaya cheerlessly looked at the king, O scorcher of foes, who, having recovered his senses, was weeping in great affliction.
And, O king of kings, appoint thou a time.
Men also, struck down, fell on the Earth, uttering diverse cries of pain, O sire; others, beholding their relatives and sires and grandsires, and others seeing retreating foes, shouted to one another their well-known names and the names of their races.
Yudhisthira replied--O Krishna, my resolve is already crowned with fruit, and success also is surely mine, when thou, O Harishikesa, hast arrived here agreeably to my wish!
That very receptacle of austerities, sitting now as if scorching everything with his eyes, O god, we are going together to tempt.
And before his incarnation, O king, the god Soma had said these words to the celestials, I cannot give (part with) my son.
Chitraratha, and Manjula, and Vahini; and Mandakini, and Vaitarani, and Kosa, and Mahanadi; and Suktimati, and Ananga, and Pushpaveni, and Utpalavati; and Lohitya, Karatoya, and Vrishasabhya; and Kumari, and Rishikullya and Marisha, and Saraswati; and Mandakini, and Supunya, Sarvasanga, O Bharata, are all mothers of the universe and productive of great merit.
O child, the mind cannot be kept under control when it is influenced by hauteur, vanity, or pride.
Therefore, O Yajnaseni, tend him in the forest day and night.
He did not, however, wish to falsify the words of Gandhari and the Rishis, O scorcher of foes.
Resting here for some time and refreshing ourselves with food, I will, O Galava, return.
Then the foremost of the Yadavas, Vishnu seizing Dhritarashtra by the hand, O monarch, began to weep melodiously.
Listen, however, with attention, O Vidura, to the reason of my coming.
And the elder brother of Gada, for the sake of the Pandavas, then said to Karna,--It hath been heard by me, O Karna, that from hatred of Bhishma thou wilt not fight.
Then thy son, that great car-warrior, swooned away, O king.
Meanwhile Sharadvatas son, in that battle, O sire, with great activity, sped many arrows at Shikhandi, as if for the purpose of burning him outright.
O thou of mighty arms, if thou thinkest that I can listen to it without harm, then tell me everything.
Even so, O son of Radha, thou regardest thyself a lion, for thou dost not behold that repressor of foes, that tiger among men, viz., Dhananjaya.
And, O king, I have obtained it as a boon from Indra that though fall I must upon the earth, yet I should fall amidst the wise and the virtuous.
Say all these unto me, O lord.
And, O Yudhishthira, while at intervals of business, I went out (of the inner apartments) and sat on the lap of my father, that learned Brahmana used to recite unto me these truths, sweetly consoling me therewith!
Then, O king, the illustrious Narayana of fierce energy, the Creator and Destroyer of all, that preceptor of Yoga, filling Heaven with his splendour, reached his own inconceivable region.
And while Ruru was indulging in these lamentations for the loss of his bride, a messenger from heaven came to him in the forest and addressed him thus, The words thou utterest, O Ruru, in thy affliction are certainly ineffectual.
O king, like a raft made of stone, who have a woman, a deceitful person, or a child, for their guide.
Let this thy fear, O best of kings, be dispelled.
Then that dreadful encounter, making the very hair stand on end, took place between those two sons of thine, O king, for terminating the quarrel (that had raged for many years).
The seven Matris also were present there, O monarch, and the Sadhyas, the Viswedevas, the Maruts, the Vasus, the Rudras, the Adityas, the Siddhas, the Danavas, the birds, the self-born and adorable Brahman with his sons, and Vishnu, and Shakra, all went thither for beholding that child of unfading glory.
Janamejaya said, While those foremost of men--the sons of Pritha--were passing their days in the forest exposed to the inclemencies of the winter, the summer, the wind and the sun, what did they do, O Brahmana, after they had reached the lake and woods going by the name of Dwaita?
Tell me, O Janardana, by what means I may obtain her.
Divine Krishna said, Here am I O mighty-armed one.
Filled with wrath, Bhima then, O sire, despatched with his arrows the driver and the four steeds of thy son to Yamas abode.
O auspicious one, surrounded by every comfort, thou mayest live there in happiness.
Rama said, Thyself, divested of desire, with what mood of mind, O Bhishma, didst thou abduct, on the occasion of her self-choice, his daughter of the king of Kasi and again dismiss her subsequently?
O blessed lady, listen to these words that are beneficial to thee!
Reflecting on this, from every point of view, with the aid of thy intelligence, O foremost of all intelligent persons, and ascertaining with thy intelligence what is for thy highest good, command me, O king!
O learned Brahmana, what that wonderful feat was which the great Rishi Vyasa of high energy accomplished after his promise to the old king, made when Dhritarashtra, that lord of Earth, that foremost one of Kurus race, had taken up his abode in the forest, with his wife and with his daughter-in-law Kunti; and after, indeed, Vidura had left his own body and entered into Yudhishthira, and at the time when all the sons of Pandu were staying in the ascetic retreat.
And, O best of all the scions of Bharatas race!
Pandus son Savyasaci of great might, O king, beholding a remnant of thy army still standing for battle, became filled with wrath.
Thou also, O learned one, will admit this.
In this way, O bull of Bharatas race, the illustrious Pandavas lived there for some time.
The battle between them, O scorcher of foes, became so awful that its like, O monarch, I had never seen before.
Covered with matted locks and attired in golden rays, he bore in his hands, O king, a staff made of gold and a waterpot made of the same precious metal.
When all the warriors were slain and Duryodhana was struck down, when in consequence of the battle the empire of Pandus son became perfectly foeless, when all the (Kuru) camp became empty, all its inmates having fled, when great renown was won by the son of Pandu, what, O regenerate one, was the cause for which Krishna had once again to go to Hastinapura?
What thou sayest, O Madhava, is perfectly true.
Then Satyaki, O king, rushed in that battle against thy army with great impetuosity, at which that army broke.
Then the gods, together with Indra, Lomasa said, Then gathered together, Brahma, the grandfather of men (thus) addressed, Go ye, O gods!
53 54 Sanjaya said, Then Kritavarma, and Kripa, and the son of Drona and the Sutas son, O sire, and Uluka, and Subalas son (Shakuni), and the king himself, with his uterine brothers, beholding the (Kuru) army afflicted with the fear of Pandus son, unable to stand together, like a vessel wrecked on the ocean, endeavoured to rescue it with great speed.
O best of men, it behoveth thee to tell me what is good for me now, for I am now a wanderer with an empty heart, despoiled of my kinsmen and of my possession.’ Vaishampayana continued: Having heard these words of Vyasa of immeasurable energy, the son of Pritha, receiving his permission, returned to the city named after the elephant.
Hearing these words, Bhishma answered, I have already said, O blessed one that the course of morality is subtle.
After this day, O monarch, he shall not again cast his eyes on female beauty!
Since deliberately, O slayer of Madhu, thou wert indifferent to this universal carnage, therefore, O mighty-armed one, thou shouldst reap the fruit of this act.
O monarch, that my promise never remains unfulfilled.
Although flying away, thus, O monarch, why dost thou not yet rally them in battle?
My elder brother has forcibly taken away from me all my household goods and mystical gods, and sacrificing clients, and has now left to me only this physical body of mine, and, O son of Avikshit, as he is worthy of all respect from me, I cannot by any means officiate at thy sacrifice, unless with his permission.
Beholding those brave warriors loudly rebuking one another in that battle, I thought, O king, that their periods of life had been run out.
Beholding this, O monarch, Dhrishtadyumna, the son of the Pancala king, proceeded towards those elephants, from desire of slaughtering them.
Then thy son, O king, went away from Bhimasenas presence.
I will tell thee everything in detail, And, O illustrious one, listen to the one hundred and eight names (of the sun) as they were disclosed of old by Dhaumya to the high-souled son of Pritha.
Vaisampayana continued,--The Pandavas thereupon said,--O sinless one, let it be as thou sayest.
These illusions have ended, O puissant one.
Regardless of life itself, which is so difficult of being sacrificed, in that fierce combat, O Bharata, I baffled all those weapons with such of mine as are capable of baffling them.
With those three arrows sped from the arms of his foe sticking to his fore-head, Nakula, O king, looked beautiful like a mountain with three crests.
O bull among men, my son and thy brother, endued with energy and dear unto thee, hath gone childless to heaven while still a boy.
O daughter, let the whole earth, conquered by the prowess of thy husbands endued with great strength, be given away by thee unto Brahmanas at horse-sacrifice!
Then unto Dasarathas son who said so, Rama of Bhrigus line replied, A truce to all crafty speech, O king!
Their forms, O Bharata, I am incapable of describing in consequence of their great effulgence and speed.
Reflecting for a short while, O monarch, he said these words in great affliction.
Beholding those followers of Subalas son thus advancing in battle, the victorious Pandavas, O monarch, proceeded against them.
Then Devala, beholding the power derived through Yoga of Jaigishavyas penances, reflected upon it with his righteous understanding and approaching that great ascetic, O king, with humility, addressed the high-souled Jaigishavya, saying, I desire, O adorable one, to adopt the religion of Moksha (Emancipation)!
Even as he of Vrishnis race protects by every means the son of Pandu in all dangers, do thou, O chief of the Madras, protect the son of Radha today.
I will duly relate it in full, O listen!
Urged by a curiosity that is not improper for Brahmanas, I desire, O Lord of all the gods, to hear all this from thee, O thou of eyes like lotus leaves, with every detail and exactly as it all happens, for all I have seen, O Lord, is wonderful and inconceivable!
Yudhishthira said, O Krishna, thou speakest well.
In this there will be no cruelty.’ Yudhishthira said, ‘O thou of a 1,000 eyes.
Slowly restored to consciousness, and understanding that the ladies of the household were there, the king, O monarch, remained perfectly silent for some time like one reft of reason.
And, O Yudhishthira, it behoveth thee not to covet anything!
O chief of the Kurus, thou art the first of those that should restrain the Kurus if they behave deceitfully towards strangers or those numbering with themselves.
O Vidura, all that thou sayest is crooked, although I hold thee in high esteem.
Do thou, therefore, O sinless one, describe the battle in detail.
Dhritarashtra, therefore, O Janardana, is worthy of our respect and worship.
And, O prince of Kurus race, the city filled as it was with joyous and healthy souls, in consequence of his presence, looked gay like Amaravati with the presence of the chief of the celestials.
Hearing these words uttered by that high-souled Deity, the gods repaired unto the Grandsire and inclining him to grace, said these words, We have accomplished everything, O holy one, that thou hadst ordered us to do in the matter of afflicting the foes of celestials.
Seeing him fallen, the Bharata ladies O king, surrounded him on all sides and gently rubbed him with their hands.
How hast thou, O Parasara, being so superior, engaged thyself in such a sinful practice?
By words fraught with reasons, visible and invisible that are all the result of time, thou wilt quickly, O thou of great wisdom, be able to pacify Gandhari!
Even this, O king of kings, is what thou askest me.
And sometimes after the wedding, the daughter of Hiranyavarman, O best of monarchs, attained her youth while the daughter of Drupada also had attained hers.
O Lord, this whole universe is rendered hot by thy splendour, bright as the lustre of heated gold.
All of them, with glad hearts, worshipped Sahadeva, and said, By good luck, O hero, Shakuni of wicked soul, that man of evil course, hath, with his son, been slain by thee!
O amiable one, thou speakest sweetly, with proper accent and emphasis; and we are well-pleased with thy speech.
Lakes and wells, O best of kings, vomited forth blood.
Know me, O king of men, to be Vrihannala, a son or daughter without father or mother.
Therefore, O thou of mighty arms, at my command, raise offspring on them for the perpetuation of our line.
Know this, O thou possessed of great wisdom, that anger is the root of all prosperity and all adversity.
And then, O tiger among Janamejaya said, I desire to hear from the beginning of the births of the gods, the Danavas, the Gandharvas, the Apsaras, men, Yakshas and Rakshasas.
I have, O thou of virtuous soul, escaped with difficulty from Kritavarma at a time when he was heedless!
Vaishampayana continued, Hearing these words of Vyasa of immeasurable energy and reflecting upon them for a little while, Dhritarashtra said, ‘O best of regenerate ones, I am exceedingly afflicted by a heavy load of grief.
Yudhishthira said, What words from me, O Sanjaya, hast thou heard, indicative of war, that thou apprehendest war?
And, O Bhima, amidst foes, my size increaseth exceedingly by its own energy.
Shall I not succeed, O Kesava, in avenging myself of the insult, in the shape of dragging her by the hair, offered unto Draupadi, undeserving as she was of that wrong.
O monarch, that was no deer that Pandu struck at, but a Rishis son of great ascetic merit who was enjoying his mate in the form of a deer.
There, O Partha, Duryodhana stayeth in the midst of his cavalry, with the umbrella held over his head and himself flinging his glances all around!
Each resembling Vasudeva, or Rama, or Visravanas son (Ravana), they looked, O monarch, like Madhu and Kaitabha.
O illustrious prince, thou art truthful in speech, and conversant with morality.
Therefore, O Partha, address this Yudhishthira as thou when his usual form of address is your honour.
That battle between fearless combatants, enhancing the population of Yamas kingdom, resembled, O monarch, that between the gods and the Asuras in days of yore.
And when that prince, that mighty car-warrior and great bowman, was (thus) slain, loud cries of oh and alas arose among thy troops, O sire.
And O blessed lady, thou wilt behold the king--thy lord--freed from all sins and decked with all kinds of gems, and ruling the selfsame city, and chasting his enemies, and striking terror into the hearts of foes, and gladdening the hearts of friends, and crowned with every blessing.
It is for this, O best of Brahmanas, that I regard the (proposed) act as virtuous.
Even thus the pure-souled Arundhati, in days of old, obtained the highest success, like thee, O highly blessed lady, for my sake, O damsel of rigid vows!
During the night, O king, thy camp has been exterminated by the cruel Kritavarma, and Kripa, the son of Gautama, and the sinful Ashvatthama!
Agni said, O lord of the earth, Sakra is perfectly happy, he is pleased with thee, and wishes to make thee free from senility, and all the other gods are loyal to him.
Except thee, O foremost of men, what other person is there that is able to even behold that lady of eyes red like copper in wrath and exceedingly afflicted with the ills that have befallen her children?
Duryodhana said, It is not at all a matter of surprise, O king, that fear should enter the hearts of living creatures.
If thou comest back, O learned Brahmana, thou wilt surely meet with death.
Bear thou, O Sesha, properly and well this Earth so unsteady with her mountains and forests, her seas and towns and retreats, so that she may be steady.
Then O king, the wicked Salwa, thus afflicted by the Vrishnis, mounted on his car of precious metals, and leaving Dwaraka scudded through the skies!
And let, O bull of Bharatas race, proper presents be given unto all the sons of Drupada.
I desire to hear of it from thee, O thou foremost of all virtuous men!
And O king, I will now tell thee of the servants of the Pandavas, people for whom Yudhishthira supplieth food, both cooked and uncooked.
O Suyodhana, slaying thee, with all thy uterine brothers, I shall strike the crown of thy head with my foot in the sight of the king Yudhishthira the Just!
The reciter also, O chief of the Bharatas, should be decked with ornaments and fed sumptuously.
Slain on the field of battle, O foremost of men, Karna entered Surya.
And, O king, after Rituparna had gone, king Nala did not stay long in the city of Kundina!
Give back unto the sons of Pandu, O chastiser of foes, their proper share.
O thou of mighty arms, recover thy paternal share of the kingdom which thou hast lost, by conciliation, or by working disunion among thy foes, or by gift of money or violence, or well-directed policy.
Therefore, O Sakra, take my earrings and excellent mail in exchange for something conferred by thee on me!
O thou of excellent vows, thou practisest penances with great devotion.
With great activity that hero, with his shafts, cut off the arms and the heads of his brave foes, O king, and their ears decked with earrings.
Entering those apartments, everybody, O Bharata, began to sport, according to his pleasure.
O Saint, who deemest thy religious practices as thy only treasure.
Desirous of rescuing their father, the sons of Karna, all of whom were effectual smiters, and many other heroes, O king, of thy army, resisted those (Pandava) heroes.
Therefore, O younger brother of Aruna, take me thither, so that I may behold the gods.
And, O lord of men, if Vrihaspati act as thy priest, thou shalt be able to conquer all the regions inhabited by men, and the heavenly regions, and all the highest regions created by Prajapati and even the entire kingdom of the gods.
And, O king, collect everything that thou needest for the impending war.
From desire of slaying Bhimasena, O king, for these thirteen years hath Duryodhana practised with the mace upon a statue of iron!
He is in that place which is his own, O mighty-armed one.
O son of Pritha and descendant of Kuru, I now tell thee truly, desiring to do only what is good and agreeable to thee, and there can be nothing equivocal in it in any way, that the necessity for my staying here no longer exists, because, O Arjuna, that monarch the son of Dhritarashtra bath been slain with his armies and attendants, and the earth, my friend, with its girdle of seas and its mountains and woods and forests, and the kingdom of the Kuru king filled with various gems, have passed under the sway of that wise son of Dharma.
In battle, he is superior in might to Shikhandi and Arjuna and Bhima and Satyaki and Dhrishtadyumna, O Bharata.
Accept, O lord, this victim!
All the Pancalas too have been slain, as also the remnant of the Matsyas, O Bharata!
Throngs of cars, and large bodies of horses, and teeming divisions of infantry and elephants in large numbers mingled with one another, O king, for battle.
Just at that moment he heard piteous lamentations all around, ‘O son of Dharma, O royal sage, O thou of sacred origin, O son of Pandu, do thou stay a moment for favouring us.
They then resembled, O monarch, two oceans agitated by the tempest.
Krishna said, Indeed, the destruction of the earth is at hand when my words, O Karna, do not become acceptable to thy heart.
Then the ruler of the Madras, O sire, cut off, with a razor-headed arrow, the bow with arrow fixed on it of the high-souled Nakula.
Almost all the sons of Dhritarashtra, O giver of honours, have been slain by Bhima!
While a child playing with a ball in my hands, thy grandfather, O Kesava, gave me away to his friend, the illustrious Kuntibhoja.
O thou foremost of ordinance-observing persons, seeing that thou art my son and a minor too, and beholding also thy rashness, I see that I must counsel thee.
O king, do good to the world and thy own race by casting off this one child of thine.
Thus addressed by her, the illustrious god, smiling as he cast his eyes on her, and knowing her observances, addressed her sweetly, O Bharata, saying, Thou practisest penances of the austerest kind!
That act, however, doth not burn me so keenly as this plight to which thou hast been reduced, O king!
Do thou, therefore, O foremost of monarchs rely on me!
There, O son of Radha, thy son, Vrishasena, filled with wrath at sight of the stupefaction that has overwhelmed thee, is rushing towards the Pandavas.
I do not, O Karna, remember the slightest fault in me for which, O thou of mighty arms, thou mayst desire to slay my innocent self.
It behoveth thee; O hero, to grant him permission!
Thou hadst, also, O thou of wicked understanding, endeavoured to burn all the Pandavas with their mother at the palace of lac!
Behold, O Bharata, this is the proof.
It was even thus, O Janamejaya, that the high-souled Utanka, having wandered through the three worlds, fetched those jewelled ear-rings (for his preceptors wife).
After some time, O prince of men, Vasishtha, accompanied by the monarch, went to the latters capital known all over the earth by the name of Ayodhya.
That mighty-armed hero, O monarch, was solicited by the righteous king as also by Vibhatsu, and induced to assume relations of cordiality towards thee.
Then Sahadeva, O king, having first pierced thy son with an arrow, pierced him again with seventy arrows, and then his driver with three.
Those men that cast off their bodies after having practised austere penances, obtain the status of gods, O auspicious one!
Creatures, O bull of Bharata’s race, whether mobile or immobile, have to repeatedly return to the world.
And his friend, Uttara and her maidens then said unto Vrihannala, Do thou, O Vrihannala, bring for our dolls (when thou comest back) various kinds of good and fine cloths after vanquishing the Kurus assembled for battle of whom Bhishma and Drona are foremost!
The citizens also (of Hastinapura), devoted to the house of Kuru, with hearts filled with anxiety at the destruction that had overtaken their rules, set up, O king, a wail that was as loud as that uttered by those ladies.
O king, many are the rules of virtue that prevail amongst men, and all those are known to thee.
O sinless one, O thou foremost of the Kuru race, I will grant thee whatever thou mayst ask me.
Visoka said, How is it, O Bhima, that thou dost not hear the loud twang of the yawning Gandiva stretched by Partha in wrath?
And, O child, O offspring of Vasishthas son, thou hast also been, in this sacrifice, only an instrument in the destruction of these innocent Rakshasas.
Sanjaya said, Beholding Duryodhana slain by Bhimasena in battle, O king, like a wild elephant slain by a lion, the Pandavas with Krishna became filled with delight.
O learned Kshattri, O thou of great wisdom, thou, O bull of Bharatas race, art now my refuge.
O prince (Duryodhana), thou regardest thyself as mature in intellect, and, O thou of bad heart, thou regardest me as a child.
With head-gear fastened on his head, and wearing an armour made of gold, licking the corners of his mouth, O monarch, with eyes red in wrath, and breathing hard, thy son, on that field, O king, looked resplendent like the golden Sumeru.
O daughter of Bhima, thou wilt behold Nala, the lord of the Nishadhas, the slayer of foes, and the foremost of the virtuous freed from distress.
Although the Sarasvati seems to be lost there, yet persons crowned with ascetic success, in consequence of their obtaining great merits and great blessedness at that spot, and owing also to the coolness of the herbs and of the land there, know that the river has an invisible current, O monarch, through the bowels of the earth there.
O best of men, thou repeatedly pointest out to me the way and it is by this, O god-like one, that thou enhancest my grief.
Thou shalt have to repent, O great king, along with thy children, kinsmen, and counsellors, even as thou art now bragging joyously in view of our sufferings.
Proceeding to the city of the Vrishnis with Daruka in his company, O puissant king, that hero beheld that the city of Dwaraka looked like a woman bereft of her husband.
Vaisampayana said,--then, O king, Yudhishthira, having approached and worshipped his grandfather and his preceptor, addressed Bhishma and Drona and Kripa and the son of Drona and Duryyodhana and Vivingsati, and said,--Help me ye all in the mater of this sacrifice.
The driver of the car, O hero, should be superior to the warrior on it.
O blessed one, the family into which thou hast been admitted as a daughter-in-law, is such that those who are born in it, however much they might be afflicted by calamities, never deviate from the paths of virtue and morality.
Equipped with weapon and seated on their cars, the angry sons of Pandu like wrathful and venomous snakes will assuredly annihilate us, O father.
And, O king of Panchalas, Dhritarashtra and all the Kurus, in consequence of this alliance with thee regard themselves supremely blest.
O bull of Bharatas race, do not grieve.
Hearing the words of the Sutas son the son of the ocean-going (Ganga) laughed aloud and said, As long, O son of Radha, as thou encounterest not in battle Partha with his arrows, conch, and bows and rushing to the combat on his car with Vasudeva in his company, so long mayest thou think so!
I wish to see him again, with thy leave, O Phalguna!
I, therefore, desire to hear, O bearer of the discus and the mace, what the true reason is of this thy refusal.
Having promised me the slaughter of Karna, thou hast not, O hero, kept that promise.
Utanka said, Whither, O ruler of men, shall I be able to meet thy queen?
O Rama of great effulgence, equip thyself as thou listest for single combat!
Then Citra, O monarch, sped at thy grandson a terrible and irresistible dart, adorned with golden bells, and resembling a flame of fire.
Brahmanas may be found everywhere; Kshatriyas may be found everywhere; so also Vaishyas and Shudras, O Karna, women of chastity and excellent vows may also be found everywhere.
Think of all this, O king in thy mind!
The Sutas son possessed of great prowess, O king, then slew many thousands of other warriors skilled in fight.
Do not give way to wrath on hearing the delirious ravings of my afflicted self, O, protect ye the ruler of the Sindhus.
This, O king, is my fixed resolve.
Bloody showers, as also showers of dust, fell, O Bharata!
Saying, So be it, O monarch, Kuntis brave son, the lord Yudhishthira, proceeded towards Samantapanchaka.
Even this is the boon I solicit, All created things, O divine Being, belonging to thee, are being destroyed.
Vaisampayana continued, The high-souled Govinda, of eyes like lotus leaves, then raising his mighty (right) arm, and in a voice deep as that of the clouds, replied unto the king in excellent words fraught with reasons,--words that were clear, distinct, correctly pronounced, and without a single letter dropped, saying, Envoys, O king, eat and accept worship only after the success of their missions.
Thou believest thyself to be conversant with virtue, but thou dost not know, O Partha, that the slaughter of living creatures is a sin.
Hence, O son of Hridika, the Yadavas will never tolerate what thou hast done.’ When Yuyudhana had said these words, Pradyumna, that foremost of car-warriors, applauded them, expressing his disregard for the son of Hridika.
Through thy grace, O bull among men, we have acquired our objects.
Indeed, O child, like dogs before the lion, these (monarchs) are barking in rage before the sleeping lion of the Vrishni race.
O son of Pritha, it is the staking at dice, which may be lost or won that may injure us.
Vaisampayana said,--Hearing these words of Bhishma, the ruler of Chedi endued with exceeding prowess, desirous of combating with Vasudeva addressed him and said,--O Janarddana, I challenge thee.
It is said, O king, that a wife, a slave, and a son can never earn wealth for themselves.
I shall today pluck out the dart, O son of Pandu, that lay so long sticking to thy heart!
Lomasa continued, When Agastya thought that girl to be competent for the duties of domesticity, he approached that lord of earth-the ruler of Vidharbhas-and addressing him, said, I solicit thee, O king, to bestow thy daughter Lopamudra on me.
Therefore, become a devotee, O Arjuna.
Ones body, O king, is ones car; the soul within is the driver; and the senses are its steeds.
Armour, and weapons, and bow, these we have got already, O Grandsire.
Lomasa continued, This suggestion, O king, of begging wealth of Ilwala appeared to them to be proper.
Therefore, O foremost of virtuous men, relying on thee greatly, I shall appoint thee in a certain matter.
At this, Shalya, O monarch, excited with rage, deeply pierced all of them with ten arrows, like persons piercing mighty elephants with sharp-pointed lances.
Blessed be thou; my anger hath subsided, O beautiful one!
Be a man, O son of Gandhari, and fight with good care!
The five Pandavas, O king, desire only five villages.
With the lightness of hand, O Bharata, of the high-souled Karna on that occasion, all the gods as also the Siddhas and the Charanas were gratified.
In desiring, O Karna, to fight today with Arjuna of keen-edged feats, thou art for rubbing all thy limbs against the keen edges of a trident.
That is no loss, O king, which bringeth on gain.
But know, O Karna, what I have said is for the good of all and the prosperity of the Kuru race.
O Bhima, in order to see Arjuna, thither shall we repair, in company, with Brahmanas of strict vows, girding on our swords, and wielding our bows.
Those two foremost heroes of Yadus race, the one dark in complexion and the other fair, looked exceedingly beautiful at that moment, like the Sun and the Moon, O king, on the evening sky!
I say, O father, that what proceeds from thy mouth, is not correct.
O, yonder is thy calf, tied with a stout cord, and even now being weakened by it!
I do not, O great king, come to thee as one who was to have been wedded to another!
Then, O slayer of Danavas, overcome with fear of the monster, with thy hands clasped in supplication, thou didst seek the protection of the great sage.
Vrihadaswa said, O great king, O son of Pandu, thou sayest, There is no person more miserable than I am O sinless monarch, if thou wilt listen, I will relate unto thee the history of a king more wretched than thyself?
Endued with little understanding, thou, O Karna, disregarding that lion among men, viz., the son of Pandu, yellest at him, like a jackal that, disregarding a maned lion excited with wrath, yells at him.
Sanjaya continued, Be still, O king!
Indeed, it is even thus that I shall take thee to my capital, O thou of sweet smiles!
Bowing unto all the elders, and congratulated by everybody, Partha at last approached Yudhishthira, and addressing him, said, Give me leave, O lord, to observe the vow I took.
They then, O king, repeatedly uttered leonine roars.
Janamejaya said, While living thus disguised in the city of the Matsyas, what did those descendants of the Kuru race endued with great prowess, do, O regenerate one!
But this sacrifice of thine, O foremost one of Bharatas race, O son of Parikshit, is fully equal to ten thousand sacrifices of Sakra.
O son, do not grieve for it in the least.
Then, O king, Rama proceeded to the asylum of Vaka which was not very distant from where he was, that asylum in which, as heard by us, Dalvya Vaka had practised the austerest of penances.
--Thus addressed (by Ulupi), Vijaya became cheerful of heart and said unto her, All this that thou hast done, O goddess, is highly agreeable to me.
Unto him who said those words, O king, Satyaki, conversant with high weapons, taking up some keen arrows, smilingly replied, This is no assembly, O prince, nor the abode of our preceptor, where in former days we sported together.
The helpless lady, with heart agitated by grief, beholding Govinda coming, indulged in these lamentations; O lotus-eyed one, behold us two deprived of our child.
O Bharata, this proposal about a stay in the woods was uttered but once.
In Duryodhanas army then, O monarch, which had numbered many hundred thousands of warriors, not another great car-warrior was seen to be alive, save the heroic son of Drona, and Kritavarma, and Kripa the son of Gotama, O monarch, and that lord of the earth, thy son!
Sinful and disreputable is that act, which thou, O king, art about to do.
Without losing a moment, he then cut off the bow and the leathern fence of Satyasena also, O sire, at which all the troops there uttered a loud shout.
Having again caused an elephant of the name of Ashvatthama to be slain, O thou of wicked understanding, thou causedst the preceptor to lay aside his weapons.
They replied, Nahusha is of awful mien; his sight is poison; we are afraid of him, O God.
And a thousand foot-soldiers, and a thousand horsemen, and attendants by hundreds, also formed his train, carrying, O king, provisions in abundance.
And they, O king, who will invoke me, after thy manner, in exile or in the city, in the midst of battle or of dangers from foes, in forests or in inaccessible deserts, in seas or mountain fastnesses, there is nothing that they will not obtain in this world.
Urge the steeds, O Hrishikesha, and my car, O great car-warrior!
Many were the Rishis, O king, that came to that sacrifice.
And overwhelmed, O king, with grief, I repeatedly said,--Alas, great is the sin committed by me through observance of Kshatriya practices, since I have afflicted with arrows my preceptor who is a Brahmana endued with a virtuous soul!--After that, O Bharata, I ceased striking Jamadagnis son any more.
Indeed, O Karna, slay this Dhananjaya that resembles a snake frequently darting out its tongue, or a roaring bull, or a tiger in the forest.
O thou of Vrishnis race, it is evident that this Bhishma, with wrath excited, will annihilate for Duryodhanas benefit my host.
O hero, Drona always boasteth of the numerous accomplishments of Partha.
I hope, O king, that none of these grave calamities have overtaken thee.
Dhritarashtra said, I request thee, O Sanjaya, to tell me again of the lotus-eyed Krishna; for, by being acquainted with the import of his names, I may, O son, obtain that most exalted of male beings.
Those two, in return, O king, duly worshipped him, their superior, joyfully, like Indra and Upendra worshipping Brahman, the lord of the celestials.
O resister of foes, behold him coming like a blazing meteor, falling from the firmament!
Why also do you stay here?’ Thus addressed, they answered him from all sides, saying, ‘I am Karna!’ ‘I am Bhimasena!’ ‘I am Arjuna!’ ‘I am Nakula!’ ‘I am Sahadeva!’ ‘I am Dhrishtadyumna!’ ‘I am Draupadi!’ ‘We are the sons of Draupadi!’ Even thus, O king, did those voices speak.
Bathing here, O son of Pandu, with thy brothers and Krishna, thou wilt certainly regain that energy of thine that hath been taken away by Duryodhana, even as Rama regained his that had been taken away by Dasarathas son in hostile encounter.
As long as men, O king, shall speak of thee, so long shall thy glory endure, and thou shalt inhabit the holy regions.
By good luck, victory hath been thine, O Govinda!
Do not, O Sutas son, challenge that prince of mighty energy like a fox gratified with meat in the forest challenging the maned monarch of the forest.
Today thou shalt, O Madhava, comfort Krishna of tearful face and king Yudhishthira the just with words sweet as nectar.
By good luck thou meetest me, O son of Pandu.
Hearing these words of Duryodhana, Sakuni replied,--Hear how thou mayest obtain this unrivalled prosperity that thou beholdest in the son of Pandu, O thou that hast truth for thy prowess.
(At that time) I heard, O thou of mighty arms, that three maidens, all unrivalled for beauty, daughters of the ruler of Kasi, by name Amva, Amvika, and Amvalika would select husbands for themselves, and that all the kings of the earth, O bull of the Bharatas race, had it behoveth thee to do towards me that which is consistent with morality.
O son of the Pandavas, thou hast heard a wonderful history.
But, O master of men, I find no occasion for thy grief.
For this, O Karna, I narrate this instance to thee once more.
Then Duryodhana, alighting from his car, joined his hands and addressing Shalya, that rival of Drona and Bhishma in battle, who was on his car, said these words, O thou that art devoted to friends, that time has now come for thy friends when intelligent men examine persons in the guise of friends as to whether they are true friends or otherwise.
Thus slaughtered in battle by the Pandavas, thy troops, O king, suddenly dispersed in all directions like congregated masses of clouds dispersed by the wind.
Alas, when such is the case, O Sanjaya, why have I then to hear of the frequent defeats and deaths of my sons?
Thy brothers, O delighter of the Kurus, have succeeded in winning regions of felicity.
Or, O Radheya, let messengers be despatched to bring them hither, so that, when arrived, we may through trusted agents, by some of the above methods, cause them to be slain.
I have still, O Vidura, come to the Kurus.
Having practised after that, O king, the severest austerities, he obtained a boon, highly difficult of acquisition, for encountering the Pandavas in battle.
I have lived long under thy protection, O son, I have for many years been served by thee with reverence.
But although we regard him much, still he regardeth us not and is engaged in doing us ill. And, O king, without knowing his own strength and the dignity of the race to which he belongeth, he hath placed himself under Jarasandhas shelter at sight of the latters blazing fame alone.
Hearing the rattle of Dronas car, O king, that resembled the roar of the clouds, the Prabhadrakas, O sire, began to tremble.
All the diverse kinds of wealth, O foremost of kings, that are proposed to be bestowed upon Janardana ought never to be bestowed upon him.
Freed from the conflagration at Khandava, O king, he had, from anger, penetrated through the earth (for going to the subterranean region).
By good luck, thou hast, O hero, like an infuriated elephant, crushed with thy foot the head of Duryodhana on the field of battle!
That mighty Rishi, O king, will admonish thy son for the welfare of this race.
The mighty-armed Anakadundubhi wished to smell the head of his sister’s son but failed to do it, O slayer of foes.
Behold, O hero, that discus of Keshava, that enhancer of his fame, which is always worshipped by the Yadus.
And, O bull of the Bharata race, from that time the monarchs (of other countries) forsake this city for fear of Agni.
36 Vaishampayana said, Baladeva (as already said), proceeded next to the tirtha called Udapana in the Sarasvati, that had formerly been the residence, O king, of the illustrious (ascetic) Trita.
The preceptor, O king, had formed the great circular array.
Behold them yet alive, O king!
Srenimat also, O monarch, having fought with great prowess and accomplished the most difficult feats, hath repaired to Yamas abode.
That day, O Bharata, Kunti heard a loud and heart-rending wail of sorrow coming from within the apartments of the Brahmana.
Then that tiger among men, in that dreadful battle, struck Prativindhya in the abdomen, at which the latter, O king, deprived of life, fell down on the Earth.
And upon the birth of that child endued with extraordinary strength, an incorporeal voice, O Bharata, as before, said, This child shall be the foremost of all endued with strength.
And then, O foremost of kings, the mighty Salwa, afflicted with the arrows of Pradyumna, rose disheartened, and speedily went away.
Thou didst not, however, O monarch, accept those counsels, from folly.
I have nothing more to say, O thou of great and pure soul!
Indeed, I have heard how the Grandsire acted as the driver of Bhava and how the Asuras also, O Bharata, were all destroyed with one shaft.
Whilst they were thus being exterminated, O Janardana, why wert thou indifferent to them?
In consequence of Duryodhanas slaughter, all this has not been fruitless, O thou of unfading glory!
And Duryodhana, O monarch, having obtained Karna (in this way), banished his fears arising out of Arjunas proficiency in arms.
If thou desirest the good of thy race, abandon him, O Bharata!
O respected sir!
Why then, O Bhimasena, dost thou insult the king in this way?
Having represented everything unto Dronas son, O Bharata, all of them remained in a thoughtful mood for a long while and then went away, grief-stricken, to the place they came from.
What also, O son, did Karna do after this, beholding Bhimasena in that battle resemble a blazing fire?
Virata said, Why, O best among the Pandavas, dost thou not wish to accept as wife this my daughter that I bestow upon thee?
Advise me wisely, O Vidura.
O foremost of Brahmanas, this thy defeat at the hands of Satwata, of Arjuna, and of Bhimasena, is like the drying of the ocean, exceedingly wonderful in this world.
O foremost of men, I intend now to live beside thee, for I do not know where those lions among kings, the sons of Pritha, are.
Indeed, Yudhishthira of mighty energy said unto me while commissioning me for this task even these words,--Thou shouldst not, O Dhananjaya, slay those kings (who may encounter thee in battle).
Vaisampayana said, Thus addressed, O Bharata, by the eldest brother of his father, the son of Kunti, from affection, gently touched every part of his body.
And the Kshatriyas there, O king, beheld Bhishma in that great battle as a being of fierce visage who was incessantly consuming the troops of the high-souled Pandavas.
I desire, O god, a son for revenging myself upon Bhishma.
Then, O king, will the Pandavas set out with Kunti and Krishna.
And, O bull in Bharatas race, those robbers were then being pursued by a superior body as guardians of the peace.
How couldst thou, O child, encounter that Duryodhana, the prince who is capable of piercing even a mountain with his mighty arrows?
And the messenger of king Hiranyavarman, having alone approached Drupada, took him aside and said unto him in private, The king of the Dasarnakas, O monarch, deceived by thee and enraged, O sinless one, at the insult thou hast offered him, hath said these words unto thee,--Thou hast humiliated me!
Indeed, O king, after the slaughter of the Sutas son, thy troops, struck with panic and mangled with arrows, were like unprotected men desirous of a protector or like a herd of deer afflicted by a lion.
O bull of Bharatas race, let not thy virtue and profit be both lost.
Dhritarashtra said, I see, O sire, that this act of Karna and Duryodhana and Suvalas son, Sakuni, and of thyself, in especial, hath been very much against the dictates of policy.
This race, O charioteer, hath multiplied from the six sons of Garuda.
The beings in the welkin, O king, applauded Karna and Arjuna.
The words of the Rishi, Cook these jujubes well were borne in her mind, O Bharata!
He then applauded those tigers among men, Madhava and Phalguna, saying, O Govinda, today I have become king of the earth, with my brothers, in consequence of thyself of great wisdom having become my protector and lord.
From what thou hast said unto me, from the manner in which the battle has been fought, it is my certain conviction, O Suta, that the Kauravas are no more.
With another broad-headed arrow, that mighty car-warrior then, O sire, cut off the stringed bow of Dharmas son in that encounter.
Utanka said, O foremost of men, O Saudasa, in my estimation thou art a worthy person from whom gifts may be accepted.
Sanjaya said, O chief of the Bharatas, Gangas son, once more addressing thy son who was plunged in thought, told him these delightful checked by his myriads of arrows.
Arjuna replied, Even by virtue of Dharmas boon, we shall, O lord of men, range about undiscovered by men.
We have heard of thy curse, O sinless lady!
Partha will not even get at Jayadratha in battle, O giver of honours.
Yayati at last turned to his youngest child, Puru, and addressing him said, Thou art, O Puru, my youngest son!
These things, O Suta, fill my heart with sorrow.
Hearing these words Vyasa replied, This practice, O king, being opposed to usage and the Vedas, hath become obsolete.
But they all, O ruler of the earth, shall perish together.
In all the worlds, including that of the celestials, there is no god equal, O Satyabhama, unto the husband.
[It is known to thee, O king, even before this, that thy other sons were all opposed to the foe for pleasing me only].
If thou wishest, O king, I will make it over to thee.
The mighty-armed Kesava, O sire, hath said unto thee what is consistent with virtue and profit.
But, O monarch, Bhimasena, endued with terrible prowess and swiftness of motion took upon his body all his brothers and mother and began to push through the darkness.
The great Mahadeva, assuming the form of a Brahmana, came to her and said, I desire alms, O auspicious one!
Commanded by thee, O aunt, I desire to go to Dwaraka.
Indeed, O bull of the Bharata race, Hiranyavarman, hearing the news after the expiry of a few days was much afflicted with wrath.
Ahalya said, Without knowing this, O holy one, I have set Utanka to this task.
Thus, O king, did Nakula subjugate the countries that lay to the west--the direction that is presided over by the god Varuna, and that had once before been subjugated by Vasudeva himself!
I do not reproach thee, O Bhimasena, for the words thou usest.
And, O beautiful lady, their affection for thy sons is equal unto what they feel for Pradyumna.
It is for these, O foremost of Brahmanas, and other incidents, that the northern region is superior to all quarters.
O pious one!
O Lord of all the worlds, thou art the one whose shelter should be sought.
Therefore, O son of Kunti, shall we all practise austerities, O king, Nakula, Sahadeva, Bhimasena, thou and myself shall then see him of the white steeds, O Kuntis son.
All these being attended to, when I take my stand on my car, I will become superior to Arjuna in the attributes of warrior and will then, O best of the Kurus, vanquish Phalguna.
64 65 Sanjaya continued, Hearing in the midst of foes, those words of his brother Bhimasena that were difficult of accomplishment, Arjuna, desiring to see the king, addressed the Vrishni hero, saying, Urge the steeds, O Hrishikesha, leaving this sea of troops!
And seeing the mouse come, the jackal addressed him and said, Blest be thou, O mouse, but listen to what the mongoose hath said.
Thus encouraged, Amva said, O thou of great vows, O holy one, today I seek thy protection!
O Dhanaujaya, hearing this loud and terrible noise, I ask thee who is that mighty car-warrior, like the lord of the celestials himself, that rallying this terrible and swelling host, is causing it to return?
The Pancalas with the Vrishnis, as also the Pandavas, O monarch, became rather cheerless after Rama had set out for Dwaravati.
Come, come, O foremost one of the Bharatas, behold Ganga who spreads her current over the three worlds.’ Thus addressed, that royal sage, viz., thy grandsire, proceeded with Dharma and all the other gods.
That invincible hero, viz., Abhimanyu, who, though a child in years, was still equal in battle to Arjuna or Keshava or Baladeva, O lord, that, warrior who was highly accomplished in battle, after making an immense slaughter of the foe, was at last encompassed by six foremost of car-warriors and slain by them.
Hearing these words of Karna, Kunti who was trembling with grief, embraced her son who was unmoved in consequence of his fortitude, and said, Indeed, O Karna, even if what thou sayest seemeth to be possible, the Kauravas will certainly be exterminated.
I do not wish to go anywhere else.’ Hearing this speech of the king, the chief of the deities, Purandara, said these words fraught with noble sense: ‘Do thou live in this place, O king of kings, which thou hast won by thy meritorious deeds.
And beholding her in that condition, Sudeshna asked, Who, O beauteous lady, hath insulted thee?
Sanjaya continued, Hearing this sacred story, thy son, O great king, Sanjaya said, Then, O king, the mighty-armed Satyaki invincible in battle, drawing in that conflict an excellent bow capable of bearing a great strain shot innumerable winged arrows resembling snakes of virulent poison, displaying his wonderful lightness of hand.
At that hour when the Sun had ascended the meridian, great slaughter, O best of men, of elephants and steeds and men, took place on both sides.
Do thou, O king, command me.
Relying on thee, O Madhava, we have fearlessly asked back our share from Duryodhana who is filled with immeasurable pride and from his counsellors.
Sanjaya said, Listen, O thou of great wisdom, to the account of that battle, that makes the hair stand on end, between Drona and the Pandayas the gratefulness, and the compassion of thy brother.
Since thou wert indifferent to the Kurus and the Pandavas whilst they slew each other, therefore, O Govinda, thou shalt be the slayer of thy own kinsmen!
Thou hast heard, O Raja, of the greatly powerful men of vast exertions, spoken of by Vyasa and the wise Narada; men born of great royal families, resplendent with worthy qualities, versed in the science of celestial arms, and in glory emblems of Indra; men who having conquered the world by justice and performed sacrifices with fit offerings (to the Brahmanas), obtained renown in this world and at last succumbed to the sway of time.
It is for this reason, O lord of earth, that that tirtha is known by the name of Prabhasa, since bathing there, Candramas regained his great (Prabha) effulgence.
Then king Duryodhana, O monarch, beholding that army of thine thus standing as if paralysed and lifeless, said, Relying upon the might of your army I have summoned the Pandavas to battle and caused this passage-at-arms to commence!
What thou gayest, O king of kings, is all true, O puissant one.
And Arjuna said,--O Bhima, the resolutions of superior men are not known in words only.
I have by my austerities, O Grandsire, created food for all these creatures.
Then sending for Ansuman, the son of Asamanjas, and his own grandson, he, O chief of Bharatas race!
And, O Bharata, Maya accepted that honour thinking highly of it.
O best of kings, whether in the science of arms, or heroism, or morality, Karna, O thou devoted to virtue, is not a fourth part of the Pandavas.
As regards this thy ever dear friend, this one who is always boastful of his skill in battle, this one who always urgeth thee, O king, to fight with the Pandavas, this vile braggart, Karna, the son of Surya, this one who is thy counsellor, guide, and friend, this vain wight who is destitute of sense, this Karna, is neither a Ratha nor an Atiratha.
Thus occurred that battle, O best of the Bharatas, in which no consideration was shown by anybody for anyone, and in which lances and swords and arrows fell fast, on every side and made the scene exceedingly terrible to behold.
And from that time, O perpetuator of the Kuru race, the girls of the city of Mahishmati became rather unacceptable to others (as wives).
The might of Brahmanas, O Sakra, is greater than that of the Kshatriyas.
Indeed, O Kaurava, that host of thine began to be slaughtered by the mighty car-warriors of the Pandavas.
I tell thee again, O son of Pandu, listen to me.
O great king, thou art thyself a mine of wealth.
Even this, O Sakra, would be fraught with great righteousness and productive of fruits of high efficacy.
Let the king bind this gem on his head, O Bharata!
Freed from falsehood as also from fratricide, thou wilt then, O Partha, cheerfully slay the Sutas son Karna!
O scion of Bharatas race!
What And in that part of the field headless trunks stood up by thousands, amongst the troops, O Bharata, of both the Kauravas and the Pandavas.
Though repeatedly solicited by thy parents, by Bhishma, Drona, and Vidura, to make peace, thou dost not yet, O king, make peace.
But good betide thee, O ruler of the earth, I ask thee to do one thing only.
When I heard that in their general campaign the sons of Pandu had conquered the chiefs of the land and performed the grand sacrifice of the Rajasuya, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success.
The son of Dharma then, O king, taking up another formidable bow, pierced Dronas son with seventy arrows in the arms and the chest.
That great car-warrior, the son of Drona, then, O king, shrouded Suratha (the Pancala) with showers of shafts before the eyes of all the Kshatriyas.
They were Narada, and Parvata and Devala of austere penances, and Viswavasu and Tumvuru, and Chitrasena., O Bharata.
Then the Brahmani, beholding her lord seized, addressed the monarch, saying, Listen to what I say, O monarch of excellent vows!
Therefore, O foremost of men, all the warriors assembled here unanimously subscribe to what the heroic son of Madri, fierce in battle, hath said!
O amiable one, be thou the mother of long-lived and heroic children, and possessed of everything that can make thee happy!
In consequence, O monarch, of steeds, covered with arrows, dragging after them, as they ran, a large number of slain combatants, the tracks on many parts of the field became entirely blocked up.
Behold, O Bharata, the gold-backed bows of slain warriors, as also their costly quivers displaced from their shoulders.
The struggle, O monarch, that took between them resembled that which takes place between a number of roaring lions fighting with each other for meat.
Behold, those standards, O Visoka, and elephants and steeds and bands of foot-soldiers are flying away.
Making the terraces of cars and the backs of steeds empty, O Bharata, and slaying the combatants that fought from the necks of elephants, and routing the foot-soldiers, that scorcher of foes, the Sutas son of great bravery, became incapable of being gazed at like the mid-day sun and looked resplendent like the Destroyer himself at the end of the Yuga.
O faultless one, beholding all these precedents it behoveth thee to do my bidding, which is not inconsistent with virtue, O princess, who is devoted to her husband, it hath also been said by those acquainted with the rules of morality that a wife, when her monthly season cometh, must ever seek her husband, though at other times she deserveth liberty.
Adored by the Brahmanas and worshipped by the kings, thou blazest forth, O king, in consequence of thy prowess, like the Sun Vaisampayana continued, Having thus spoken unto the king, Karna and Sakuni both remained silent, O Janamejaya, after their discourse was over.
There is no doubt, O Sankarshana, about this, if I am Vasudeva.
Do what may be agreeable to thee, O ruler of men.
I mention this, O king, for thy information and not from pride.
O bull of Bharatas race, the exertions of the wise are always associated with virtue, profit, and desire.
Upon the slaughter of the Madra king, O monarch, thy warriors all fled away in fear.
Having issued from the camp, the valiant Ashvatthama met his two companions and, filled with joy, told them of his feat, gladdening them, O king, by the intelligence.
Therefore, O mighty monarch thou wilt have to lead a life in the woods again.
My heart is full of compassion for him.’ Shakra said, ‘Immortality and a condition equal to mine, O king, prosperity extending in all directions, and high success, and all the felicities of Heaven, thou hast won today.
There was, in Kanyakuvja, O bull of Bharatas race, a great king of worldwide fame named Gadhi, the son of Kusika.
Beholding his own army destitute of prowess, thy son, the mighty Duryodhana, O king, proceeded to the place where Subalas son was.
Meanwhile, during the continuance of that battle, the Pandavas, O bull of Bharatas race, excited with wrath, fought with that mighty car-warrior Bhishma.
O giver of honours, there the king of the Vidarbhas will receive thee with respect.
Beholding, however, the heroic Pandavas, the brave warriors of thy army, O Bharata, though forbidden by thy son, still rushed against them.
And having settled (the matter) in consultation with them, and obtaining their assent, O mighty monarch, the charioteer started for Vidarbha, taking the children on that car.
At sight of this, O lord of the celestials, I am filled with compassion, and my mind is agitated!
But O Snake, a remedy (for this) hath been provided by me even beforehand.
Then Yudhishthira, that great car-warrior and disciple of Drona, filled with rage and the desire to retaliate, addressed Dronas son, saying O tiger among men, thou hast no affection, thou hast no gratitude, since thou desirest to slay me today.
If therefore, we behave so towards the Pandavas, shall we not, O son, deserve death at the hands of the Kurus, of these illustrious personages, and of the whole world?
And let this my priest, learned Brahmana, be sent, O king, to Dhritarashtra.
O thou of mighty arms, it hath not pleased me that the Pandavas have gone to the forest dishonestly defeated (at dice) by Duryodhana and others!
To all this, Devaniya answered, Solicited, by me, if, indeed, thou truly refusest to make me thy wife, then, O Kacha, this thy knowledge shall not bear fruit.
Rendered cheerless by it, O son, I had fainted.
I am the sole survivor, O monarch, of that vast force.
Then knowing him (Bhima) to be intoxicated with strength, and proud of the might of his arms, Hanuman, slighting him at heart, said the following words, Relent thou, O sinless one.
That brave and learned person who disregarding his own foresight, followeth, O king, (the bent of) another mans heart, sinketh in terrible affliction even like one that goeth into the sea in a boat guided by a child.
There, O Rama, where in days of yore thou hadst propitiated thy (deceased) fathers (with oblations of Kshatriya blood), slaying thee there, O son of Bhrigu, I will propitiate the Kshatriya slain by thee!
Dhritarashtra said, O child, giving my blessings to Ajatasatru, I ask thee, O Sanjaya, whether that king of the Kauravas, Prithas son, is well with his sons and brothers and counsellors.
And, O holy one, I also desire to hear all about Dushmanta--that lion among men--and how the hero obtained Sakuntala.
Thou wilt then, O learned Brahmana, get back thy ear-rings which have been taken away by a descendant of Airavatas race!
I tell thee the truth, O Salwa, truly swearing by my soul!
Those white steeds, O king, bearing Arjuna in battle, were seen careering everywhere, urged by him of Dasarhas race!
O thou best of Brahmanas, as we were desirous of heaven, of what use could wealth be to us?
Shalya said, O Sutas son, why dost thou think so low of the sons of Pandu, all of whom are endued with great might, all of whom are great bowmen, and all of whom are acquainted with every weapon?
Afflicted with grief at the calamity that overtook her lord, the Brahmani in anger cursed the royal sage Kalmashapada, Vile wretch, since thou hast today cruelly devoured under my very nose my illustrious husband dear unto me, even before my desires have been gratified, therefore shall thou, O wicked one afflicted by my curse, meet with instant death when thou goest in for thy wife in season.
Thus struck with Arjunas shafts that quickly slew men and steeds and cars and elephants, loud wails, O king, arose from the Kuru army.
Those foremost ones of Bharatas race, O chief of kings, then paid their respectful salutations to Gandhari, the daughter of Suvala and to Kunti, They next worshipped (their uncle) Vidura and met Yuyutsu, the son of Dhritarashtra by his Vaisya wife.
O thou of great wisdom, thy affections also are set on virtue.
I have no desire for kingdom, deprived as I am of friends and allies, O Bharata!
How, O hero, shall we be able to bear thee in battle?
Thinking of these things, O king, those heroes, Kripa and the others, liberated their horses from their cars and prepared to rest there for some time.
And O king, the prosperity that I beheld of Yudhishthira was such that neither the chief himself of the celestials, nor Yama or Varuna, nor the lord of the Guhyakas owneth the same.
Vaisampayana continued, After the expiration, O king, of a year from this, Dhritarashtra, moved by kindness for the people, installed Yudhishthira, the son of Pandu, as the heir-apparent of the kingdom on account of his firmness, fortitude, patience, benevolence, frankness and unswerving honesty (of heart).
2 Vaishampayana said, After the ladies had been dismissed, Dhritarashtra, the son of Ambika, plunged into grief greater than that which had afflicted him before, began, O monarch, to indulge in lamentations, exhaling breaths that resembled smoke, and repeatedly waving his arms, and reflecting a little, O monarch, he said these words.
During the progress, O king, of that battle which was destructive of great heroes, an earthly dust, terrible to behold, was raised by the wind.
O best of monarchs, that rule of conduct we cannot now abandon.
O son of Kuru, this is the lesson I carefully inculcate, that the wise should never enrage such as adders as have venom in their very glances!
Thou knowest it not, O fool, that it was Kali who did it all.
The tongue said, These arrows, O Alarka, will not cross through me.
Dhritarashtra, beholding all those heroes, with his celestial vision obtained through the grace of that sage, became full of joy, O chief of Bharatas race.
And beholding the king along with the queen afflicted with sorrow, Lopamudra approached them in due time and said, O monarch, it behoveth thee not to grieve on my account.
Even this hath ever been my thought, O mighty car-warrior, as to how, O best of men thou, wouldst slay Karna in battle.
Indeed, O king, that mighty host while being slaughtered by Bhishma endued with energy equal to that of Indra himself, broke so completely that no two persons fled together.
O repressor of foes, we will fight and either this one will slay us, or we shall slay him, O mighty-armed one.
And Salya said, O Duryodhana, O best of men, go to thy own city.
Otherwise, O Krishna, we shall certainly meet in heaven.
Clad in mail, armed with mace, and accoutred with other equipments, thy son Duryodhana then, O king, standing on the field of battle, addressed all the Pandavas, saying, Amongst you (five) brothers, let any one fight me, armed with mace!
O beautiful one, thou deservest all this.
That sharp arrow, thus shot and coursing impetuously, Bhimasena, O king, cut in twain with his the extremities of their tusks cut off, and others having their temporal globes cut open, deprived of riders, slew their own ranks and fell down uttering loud cries.
O thou of Dasarhas race, are fruitless.
Proceeding towards Duryodhana, Dronas son, approaching the Kuru king, said, Why, O Bharata, are the troops flying away as if in fear?
Vaisampayana continued, Thus addressed by his mother that hero among men, that foremost scion of the Kuru race, the intelligent king (Yudhishthira), reflecting for a moment, consoled Kunti, and addressing Dhananjaya, said, By thee, O Phalguna, hath Yajnaseni been won.
Thou, O Agni, art thyself the best offering.
Chekitana and Shikhandi and the (five) sons of Draupadi, O sire, having slaughtered thy vast army, blew their conchs.
The holy one said, I know, O monarch, the sinfulness of Dhritarashtras son, but by going there we will escape the blame of all the kings of the earth.
Having reflected in this strain for a long while, king Yudhishthira the just, filled with fear and grief, said these words unto Vasudeva: Through thy grace, O Govinda, my kingdom hath been reft of thorns!
Sakuni said,--O thou foremost of victorious persons, I will snatch (for thee) this prosperity of Yudhishthira, the son of Pandu, at the sight of which thou grievest so.
Similarly the Pandavas also, O king, words uttered by all the combatants, thy son Duryodhana, that offender against all, addressed Bhishma and Drona and Kripa and Salya, O Bharata, saying, Fight ye without boastfulness.
All those combatants, O king, had firmly resolved to win victory and had cast off fear with life itself.
Today, the period of life of this wicked son of Dhritarashtra, of uncleansed soul, hath reached its close, O chief of the Bharatas!
And having put his offerings, O king, he said to the Fire, Search out Indra.
Rama said, If, O fathers, ye are favourably disposed towards me, the boon I ask is that I may be absolved from the sins born of my having annihilated the Kshatriyas in anger, and that the lakes I have formed may become famous in the world as holy shrines.
O terror of thine enemies, what more need I tell thee, but that where thou and Pritha, and the king, the son of Dharma, and the mighty Bhimasena and the two sons of Madri are, there am I attracted with exquisite delight.
Behold, O Ulupi, this goodly sight of thy husband lying prostrate on the ground.
It is here, O bull among the twice-born, that the celestial stream called Mandakini, and the mountain Mandara are to be seen.
It was through thy fault, O king, that the match at dice had taken place.
O what have I done!
And where now, O reverend sire, is all his wealth?
O Shalya, let Dhananjaya behold today the might of my arms, when I will be engaged in shooting shafts winged with Kanka feathers in hundreds and thousands.
With the limbs and bodies, O monarch, of the slain crows, the ground covered by the spreading branches of the banyan became thickly strewn on every side.
Vaisampayana said, Hear then, O monarch, as I recite in full the auspicious account of thy own race just as I had heard it from Dwaipayana before.
The vast force of the Pandus then, O monarch, broke even as a mass of clouds is dispersed on all sides by a mighty wind.
O king, I lived for one whole year with her though she had attained the age of puberty.
O oppressor of enemies, we are to go hence, and cannot stay here longer.
That tiger among kings, is, O monarch, one of thy Maharathas.
Loud became the noise of neighing steeds of great fleetness, and of shouting men clad in mail, and of the falling darts and swords, O king, of combatants desirous of piercing the vitals of one another in consequence, O monarch, of thy evil policy.
Janamejaya said, O holy one, after my great-grandfather Partha had gone away from the woods of Kamyaka, what did the sons of Pandu do in the absence of that hero capable of drawing the bow with his left hand?
Thou, O son, are now in every way the sole staff of the blind monarch, bereft of foresight, afflicted with calamity, struck by Destiny, and who, though repeatedly dissuaded, could not abstain from pursuing his evil policy.
Do thou remain here, O Bharata, for even a short while.
Hence it is known by the name Sthanu-tirtha, O lord.
It is we that deserve to be pitied in every respect, O Kaurava!
For many long years, O Rama, thou hast boasted, saying,--I have, single-handed, vanquished all the Kshatriyas of the Earth!--Listen now to what enabled thee to indulge in that boast!
O thou best of birds, thou Lord of all, thou art the son of the merciful and high-souled Rishi Kasyapa; therefore, be not wroth but have mercy on the universe.
Our acts, righteous or unrighteous, cannot go for nothing, O thou of Vrishni’s race!
When I heard that Yudhishthira, beaten by Saubala at the game of dice and deprived of his kingdom as a consequence thereof, had still been attended upon by his brothers of incomparable prowess, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success.
In that great sacrifice, O monarch, was seen the entire population of Jamvudwipa, with all its realms and provinces, collected together.
Hearing these words of his, the charioteer soon took that foremost While the Pandavas, O Bharata, were thus being thinned, the heroic, son of Jarasandha rushed towards Drona.
Soon, O chief of the Bharatas, that host, whose noise resembled that of the agitated ocean, and which seemed to be wonderful in consequence of its cars and elephants, presented the aspect of the vast deep swelling with its surges.
Thou again, O Madhava, wilt repair to Dwaraka soon.
O, take thou soon all those, wherever they be, in heaven or in the firmament.
It is not wonderful that they should have victory whom Thou always protectest in battle, and in whose welfare Thou art always engaged, O Kesava!
Having listened to thy nectarlike speech, I desire to hear thee more.’ Vidura said, ‘Listen to me, O king, I shall once more discourse in detail on those means an acquaintance with which enable the wise to free themselves from the ties of the world.
O irrepressible one, I am terribly frightened.
For what, O lady, hast thou come here?
Then, O lord of earth!
The foolish Duryodhana of limited sight, having assembled a huge army regardeth, O slayer of Madhu, that his purposes are already achieved.
But Kasyapa, O king, revived it.
Those words were,--Thou shouldst not, O child, slay those Kshatriyas who will come against thee for battle.
At these words Savitri said, I had heard that thy emissaries come to take away mortals, O worshipful one!
Unto that invincible prince Gudakesa staying in the midst of his troops, Janardana, O chief of Bharatas race, said--He, who scorching us with his wrath, stayeth in the midst of his forces, he, who will attack our troops like a lion, he, who performed three hundred horse-sacrifices,--that banner of Kurus race, that Bhishma,--stayeth yonder!
Tell me, O sage, how the Khandava forest was consumed in days of yore.
That illustrious cow, O Matali, of universal form, who supporteth the western quarter ruled by Varuna is known by the name of Subhadra.
He made many endeavours for freeing himself from that disease by performing diverse sacrifices, O monarch!
Thy son Srutakarman, O monarch, within half the time taken up by a wink of the eye, fearlessly made Satanika steedless and driverless and carless.
Then, O Bharata, fierce became the battle that raged between the high-souled warriors of the two armies, in the space that intervened between Karna and the son of Prishata.
And addressing Vasava Hearing those copious lamentations of Duryodhana in the night, addressed Dhrishtadyumna and said, O prince, place that tiger among men, Sikhandin, today in front of Bhishma, I myself will be his protector, O prince of Panchala.
Likewise, O Rama!
Therefore, O Virochana, this Sudhanwan is now the lord of the life.
Then Yuyutsu, O king, with a winged arrow of keen edge struck Uluka with great force, like (Indra himself striking ) a mountain with the thunderbolt.
Beholding them with such afflicted countenances, thy troops, O Bharata, themselves perturbed by grief, vacantly gazed upwards.
And there among those thousands of kings and steeds and elephants, was none, O king, that was not wounded.
Virata said, I do not believe, O Vallava, that cooking is thy office.
Thy son, king Yudhishthira, too, offers thee, O royal sage, his kingdom and life-breath and wealth and all else that belongs to him.
Having heard it, thou mayest do what thou choosest, O thou that art destitute of intelligence and that art a wretch of thy race.
O thou of dull apprehension, great kings can never be friends with such luckless and indigent wights as thou!
O tell me how that tiger among men, Dhananjaya, of mighty arms and possessed of great energy, entered that solitary forest without fear.
And, O delight of the race of Kuru!
Sanjaya continued, After Shalya had been invested with the command, O giver of honours, no one among thy troops, O bull of Bharatas race, any longer felt any grief on account of Karna.
Therefore, observant of the great duty of abstention from all injuries, or friendship for all creatures, be of pious behaviour, O Bharata!
O royal sage, this region can never be rendered eternal by vanity, or pride of strength, or malice, or deceitfulness, or deception.
The cold, the warm (phlegm and bile) as well as the windy humours, O king, are the essential transformations generated in the physical body, and when these humours are evenly distributed, and are present in due proportions, they are said to be symptomatic of good health.
O sinless one, thou art truthful: if thou desirest to obtain this maiden as a gift from me, give, me then this pledge.
For, O thou of mighty arms, even if death cometh to me, I am unwilling to do anything that may displease him, leaving alone my going to the city of Dwaravati.
Although, however, thy son cried at the top of his voice, his flying troops, O king, still refused to stop.
Only five hundred horses from the remnant of the troops of Shakuni, the son of Subala, and of cars, only two hundred still remain, O Janardana!
How wouldst thou, O Bhishma, born especially as thou art in Kurus race, transgress the laws of morality and cause one that longeth for another to live in thy abode?
Those men that will die here, having abstained from food with all their senses awake, and those that will perish here in battle, shall, O king, come to heaven!
O highly gifted being, thou mayst do what now may seem proper to thee.
Although, O king, he resided long in the abode of his preceptor, he could not still acquire the mastery of any branch of knowledge or of the Vedas.
And when I looked at him, O father!
Men, O Brahmana, while walking about hither and thither, kill numberless creatures lurking in the ground by trampling on them, and even men of wisdom and enlightenment destroy animal life in various ways, even while sleeping or reposing themselves.
O slayer of hostile heroes, all the kings of the earth now living in subjection to thee, await thy commands, as they did before under Yudhishthira, awaiting his.
While the Pandavas, O bull of Bharatas race, were staying in such cheerlessness, those huntsmen, O lord, having come with great speed from the banks of that lake, arrived at the camp, filled with joy at having discovered Duryodhana.
After the Sutas son had been slain by the illustrious son of Pandu, and after thy troops had been repeatedly rallied and had repeatedly fled away, and after a terrible carnage had taken place, O foremost of men, of human beings in battle subsequent to Karnas death, Partha began to utter leonine roars.
And, O king, I shall also instruct the women of Viratas palace in singing and delightful modes of dancing Yudhishthira said, Tender, possessed of a graceful presence, and deserving of every luxury as thou art, what office wilt thou, O heroic Nakula, discharge while living in the dominions of that king?
And having said this the illustrious Kuntibhoja, who was devoted to the Brahmanas, made over the girl Pritha to that Brahmana, saying, This my daughter, O Brahmana, is of tender age and brought up in luxury.
O Karna, that divine Surya who blazeth forth in light and maketh everything visible, O foremost of all wielders of weapons, begat thee upon me.
It behoveth thee today, O foremost of all righteous persons, to give me such counsel that my vow, known throughout the world, may become true while at the same time both myself and the eldest son of Pandu may live.
And, O best of monarchs, thus attacked, the heroic Samva, the perpetuator of the Vrishni race, bore that onset of Vegavat, keeping his ground.
And, O monarch, these and a hundred other kinds of fierce portents made their appearance when the king installed Gangas son in the command of his troops.
O king, it is highly sinful and needlessly cruel.
Hearing those words of these heroes endued with great activity, he answered them, saying, So be it, and remained (as before) within the waters, having, O lord, solidified them by his powers of illusion.
And the king then went through the auspicious Sarmishtha then said, It hath been said, O king, that it is not sinful to lie on the occasion of a joke, in respect of women sought to be enjoyed, on occasions of marriage, in peril of immediate death and of the loss of ones whole fortune.
O excellent one, do thou relate all about this.
He salutes thee, O Partha.
Behold, these cars, assailed with shafts and darts, with those warriors riding on them, are being scattered, O Suta!
Dost thou regard the prosperity of thy foes as if it were thy own, that thou hast been applauding the Pandavas, O foremost of men, in the presence of Vidura?
Vaishampayana continued, In a former Yuga, O king, there were three brothers that were ascetics.
This however, O Bharata, seemed to me to be a great marvel that I behold you all come safe and sound in body, with your wives, troops, and vehicles, out of that super-human encounter.
Vasudeva said, O mighty-armed king, hearing that the son of Srutasravas (Sisupala) had been slain by me, Salwa, O best of the Bharata race, came to the city of Dwaravati!
O Kavya, slain by the Asuras and burnt and reduced to powder, I have been given to thee with thy wine.
O Krishna, why did you not tell me all this during the battle?
O thou of fair hips and sweet smiles, the lord of the celestials hath become gracious to thee.
All those expectations, however, O prince, have proved vain like those of persons expectant of fruit getting instead of a tree burthened only with flowers!
Know, O father, that I am Arjuna and Arjuna is myself.
Thus addressed (by Shalya), king Duryodhana cheerfully poured sanctified water, without losing any time, O best of the Bharatas, on the ruler of the Madras, in the midst of his troops, according to the rites ordained in the scriptures, O monarch.
Trust me, O blessed lady, I will again bring him back unto you all.
My father, Santanu, O king, was celebrated over all the world.
In great disappointment, O king, the great ascetic performed very austere penances.
A certain person, O monarch, had climbed up that tree containing some dry branches with the object of breaking them for sacrificial fuel.
And O king, my hands were fatigued in receiving that wealth.
O king, seek not to quarrel with the Pandavas!
Listen, O sinless one, to this story of a previous existence Markandeya continued, Vrishaspati had a wife (called Tara) belonging to the lunar world.
Having distributed their forces in this way, O monarch, ourselves, excited with wrath and inspired with desire of victory, proceeded against the Pandavas, having placed ourselves under the command of the ruler of the Madras.
Therefore, O tiger among men, do thou hold the reins of the steeds in this battle.
After a considerable time, O king, the illustrious Rishi one day beheld Lopamudra, blazing in ascetic splendour come up after the bath in her season.
O foremost of Brahmanas, I desire to hear all this.
After this, O chief of Bharata’s race, the god of the fire disappeared then and there.
Then the ape-bannered son of Pandu, O king, having slaughtered the Samsaptakas in battle, rushed against that portion of the Kaurava army.
Indeed, the large force of the Pandavas, coming against Shalya, O sire, stood still in that battle, like the rushing sea upon encountering a mountain.
Thus ordered by Krishna, Daruka, O best of kings, yoked those steeds unto that car covered with tiger-skins and ever capable of scorching all foes.
Thus addressed, O monarch, by the high-souled Phalguna, Krishna commanded Daruka, saying, Do all that Arjuna, that chief of Bharatas race and that foremost of all wielders of the bow, hath said.
With thee as his driver, Karna will become invincible, O king, in battle even with the gods having Sakra at their head!
Then thy son, O ruler of men, sped many showers of arrows, O Bharata, at the Pancala prince thus rushing at him.
If at thy word, O Bhishma, one that hath slain women (meaning Putana) and kine be worshipped, then what is to become of this great lesson?
I will tell thee, in reply to thy question, O Janamejaya, how both Sukra and Vrishaparvan bestowed upon him, with due rites, their daughters, and how his union took place with Devayani in special.
And having spoken those words, the wise Dhritarashtra endued with knowledge, reflecting with the aid of his wisdom and desirous of saving his relatives and friends from destruction, began to console Krishna, the princess of Panchala, and addressing her, the monarch said,--Ask of me any boon, O princess of Panchala, that thou desirest, Chaste and devoted to virtue, thou art the first of all my daughters-in-law.
O child, I always deem the Pandavas mightier than the Kurus.
Then, O chastiser of foes, the fact of Dronas having promised to seize the (eldest) Pandava was proclaimed by Duryodhana unto all his troops.
And he with a sorrowful heart made over his kingly duties to his minister, and, O lord of men!
Having, O son of Pandu, thyself caused all this calamity, thou art, again, addressing these harsh words to me.
O Krisa, tell me this, and witness the power of my asceticism.
And the valiant Bhimasena, with that arrow on his chest, looked beautiful, O best of kings, like the Krauncha mountain in days of old with the dart of Skanda.
Through thy influence, O Krishna, this Dhananjaya the son of Pandu, facing his foes, hath vanquished them, without ever turning back from any of them.
Seeing the energies of the entire universe united together in one place, O sire, the gods wondered, and at last represented unto that illustrious Deity that the car was ready.
O Bharata!
Covered also, O monarch, with the severed arms of warriors that resembled the trunks of huge elephants, that were adorned with Angadas and cased in leathern fences, and that still held swords and lances and battle-axes, and with headless bodies risen on their feet and bleeding and dancing on the field, and swarming with carnivorous creatures of diverse kinds, the Earth, O lord, presented a frightful aspect!
That army, O chief of the Bharatas, thus struck by Kiritin, fled away in the very sight of thy son.
Tell me truly, O Sanjaya, all this even if thou wilt have to repeat it!
Setting thy heart on what is truly beneficial, and restraining thyself by thy own self, do my bidding, O son, so that thou mayst not have to repent afterwards.
I tell thee truly, O great king, that without making thee over to somebody in this great battle, I will not surely go towards Arjuna, O thou of Kurus race!
And, O mighty king, Arjuna said unto Draupadi, O thou of beautiful coppery eyes, grieve not!
I do not entertain the least fear, O monarch, of either thee, or Vrikodara, the son of Pritha, or Phalguna, or Vasudeva, or all the Pancalas, or the twins, or Yuyudhana, or all the other troops thou hast!
Fearlessly, O king, that hero, that smiter of foes, rushed with speed against the elephant.
Then, O great king, Kapila was pleased with Ansuman, and that saint of a virtuous soul told him to ask for a favour from him.
O lord of earth, either Karna should fight first, or I will fight first.
O foremost of kings, to do good by serving the twice-born ones, observing all thy commands, is what I consider to be highly profitable to me, O best of men!
If the king be awake, then only shouldst thou say so, O keeper, for I like to enter having first apprised him of my arrival.
The two brothers, of great splendour, having wept for a long while, at last became freed from grief, O monarch, and as cheerful as before.
And, O king, after the chief of the Satwata race had gone to Dwaravati, king Duryodhana alone, with king Suvalas son, Sakuni,--these bulls among men,--continued to live in that celestial assembly house.
The energy with which the gods are endued is, indeed, great, but know, O Bharata, that mine is greater than that of the gods.
Destruction is certain for my luckless self in battle, when three car-warriors, O tiger among men, have if, succession transgressed thee.
Here, O Kuntis son, appeareth the hermitage of the sage Sthulasiras.
A large number of men, O chief of Bharatas race, adorned with garlands and wearing bright ear-rings made of gold, taking innumerable vessels in their hands, distributed the food unto the regenerate classes by hundreds and thousands.
Now that he is separated from Satwata, I doubt whether he is alive; O mighty-armed one, this Satyaki should have protected the king.
Having said these words, and placed Vishvamitra (on the throne), Gadhi, O king, went to heaven, and Vishvamitra became king.
Thus slaughtered by the high-souled Karna, Yudhishthiras troops, O king, afflicted with the arrows of the Sutas son, soon fled away.
Therefore, O king, let Yudhishthira the son of Kunti be summoned.
Thou canst not pretend, O Sanjaya, to be more versed than I am or Yudhishthira.
Whither then, O son of Radha, had this virtue of thine gone?
Act in such way, O son of Radha, that Bhima may not be able to slay the king today in the sight of us all,--that the king may, indeed, escape him.
O saint of a virtuous life, I am beholding all the regions.
I cannot be held, O puissant one, to have committed any fault.
His troops, O king, caused much mischief there.
Then thousands of arrows, O foremost of living creatures, shot by Karna, O sire, deprived many Pancalas of their lives.
O mighty-armed Yudhishthira, O Bhimasena that art a scorcher of foes, O Arjuna, and ye twins of great courage, listen to what I say!
Sanjaya continued, When the morning came, O monarch, Duryodhana once more addressed the ruler of the Madras endued with great activity, saying, O ruler of the Madras, hold the reins in battle of Karnas foremost of steeds.
Know, O son, that I am come here for dispelling thy doubts.
Why, then, O king, dost thou praise gambling so?
O thou of unfading glory, if the Vedas are an authority with thee, regard thou the period of a day and something more as the equivalent of thirteen years.
Behold that other son of mine, O Madhava, slain by Bhima with his mace, impelled by Draupadi and the recollection of his woes at the time of the match at dice.
O master, we desire to walk in the virtuous path of those rulers that had, besides, their souls under complete control.
But, O Bhrigus son, a reverend saint like thee cannot be asked to offer the same.
That which, O chastiser of foes, seems to thee to be for thy good, do thou adopt!
Respected by him, and with our sorrows assuaged, we have, O son, been living in the house of this Brahmana, unknown to the sons of Dhritarashtra.
And, O scion of Kurus race, king Dasaratha was greatly pleased to behold his son,--that enhancer of Kausalyas delight--possessed of eyes that were red, and arms that were sinewy.
And, O Bharata, as Rudra, the Fire-god, Swaha, and the six wives (of the seven Rishis) were instrumental to the birth of the great god Skanda, he was for that reason reputed as the son of Rudra.
I am ready, O foremost of Brahmanas, to show thee all the quarters of the earth!
O eater of burnt offerings, abandoned by thee the Universe would forthwith cease to be.
The battle between those two heroes became exceedingly fierce, O bull of Bharatas race, like the encounter between two wild and infuriate elephants with juicy secretions trickling down their limbs.
It behoveth thee, therefore, O best of the Kurus to permit me to depart.
Coming out with the bow, he cheerfully told the Brahmana, Proceed, O Brahmana, with haste, so that those wretched robbers may not go much ahead of us.
Describe to me in detail, O Vaisampayana, the entry into the capital, of that prince overwhelmed with shame and unmanned by grief!
6 Dhritarashtra said, Thou hast, O son, mentioned the names of those of my side that have been slain in battle by the Pandavas.
Vasumat said, If buying them, O king, be regarded by thee as improper, then take them as gilt from me.
Among the tribes of the Saddhyas, the gods, the Viswedevas, and the Maruts, behold, O king of kings, the mighty car-warriors of the Vrishnis and the Andhakas, viz., those heroes having Satyaki for their first, and those mighty ones among the Bhojas.
O thou of great splendour, it is from good fortune that my great grief hath been killed!
Listen to these words of mine that I utter, swearing by Truth itself, O lord, and by all my acts of piety, all my gifts, my religion, and the religious merits I have won.
O wretch, how canst thou succeed in appropriating this kingdom that lawfully belongeth to others?
That chastiser of foes then said these softly flowing words unto Dhritarashtra, Nothing is unknown to thee, O Bharata, about the past and the future!
Insult not Bhishma, O king, by saying that he doth not know what virtue is.
O giver of honours, how hast thou been transgressed by both Satyaki and Bhima?
On other days, O sire, the foremost warriors of the Pandava camp used to see in their dreams that figure leading away the sleeping combatants and Dronas son smiting them behind!
O beautiful one, my house is to thee even as thy fathers.
Having said these words unto Bhimasena, Yudhishthira, with voice choked in tears, and afflicted with grief, approached Duryodhana, that chastiser of foes, and said unto him, O sire, thou shouldst not give way to anger nor grieve for thyself.
Bhimas daughter, the cool-headed Damayanti, seeing the righteous king maddened and deprived of his senses at dice, was filled, O king, with alarm and grief.
O Naishadha, while dwelling in disguise at my house, I hope I did not wrong thee in any way, O lord of the earth!
And going thither, O king, without loss of time, obedient to the instructions of Duryodhana, did everything that the prince had bid him do.
When he will also behold my terrible car, endued with the effulgence of gold and bright gems, drawn by white steeds and furnished with the banner Vaisampayana said, In the midst, O Bharata, of all those assembled kings, Bhishma, the son of Santanu, then said these words unto Duryodhana, Once on a time, Vrihaspati and Sakra went to Brahma.
Strive, O father, to employ any of these (various) methods that may appear to thee faultless.
I place myself in thy hand, O thou of great effulgence.
Gandhari said, ‘The Pandavas and the Dhartarashtras, O Krishna, have both been burnt.
The end of Sauptika-parva 1 Janamejaya said, After Duryodhana had fallen and after all the warriors also had fallen, what, O sage, did king Dhritarashtra do on receipt of the intelligence?
In those days of yore, O monarch, Soma lived long with Rohini (exclusively).
O Hutasana; consume them with their friends and relatives.
Day after day, O ruler of the Madras, this vast Dhritarashtra force is seen to be routed by Partha because he is united with Krishna.
Covered with the shafts of Prishatas son, O king, Duhsasanas car, with standard and driver, soon became invisible.
The fear that is in thy heart, arising from Bhishma, and Drona, and Kripa, and Karna, and Dronas son, and prince Duryodhana, and Dussasana, I will dispell, O slayer of all foes, by means of an act enjoined by the ordinance.
O thou that resemblest a very god, amongst men there is none like thee!
How lucky, O Indra, that we are beholding thee safe and sound, while all thy enemies have been killed!
Thou roarest, O son of Radha, as long as thou seest not the son of Pritha.
And after the illustrious Pandavas, O king, will have received thy permission to go thither, I shall send information unto Dhritarashtra by quick messengers.
And slain by that mace, O king, the son of the ruler of the Kalingas, from his car, fell down on the ground, with his standard and charioteer.
In exchange of a crow, O great king, buy these peacocks--the Pandavas; and in exchange of a jackal, buy these tigers.
After that, O hero, he was repeatedly struck by the Sutas son (with his shafts), while he was retreating from battle.
And that hero and subduer of foes, O king, was engaged in doing good to his brothers, concluding for certain in his mind that giving and enjoying are the only use of riches.
O thou exalted one, tell me truly who hath won my daughter today?
What use of long speeches and empty bragging, O wicked-souled one!
Though frequently solicited by me, thou, O simple woman, said to me, I have been born here, and here have I grown old; this is my ancestral homestead.
And, O monarch of the earth!
Indra said, This whole indestructible universe, O gods, hath been pervaded by Vritra.
Oh, let Vijaya, let him that is called Gudakesa, let this hero with reddish eyes, come back O life.
Slaughtered by Bhima, those elephants, O king, began to fly away.
This another wish of thine, O hero, I grant thee in addition, that if thou canst slay him amongst the five Pandavas with whom thou wishest an encounter, thou shalt then be king!
Beholding Duryodhana stationed in the midst of that car-force, Shakuni, gladdening all those car-warriors of thine, O king cheerfully said these words unto Duryodhana.
I shall, therefore, O lord, follow all that thou hast told me.
I will tell thee everything truly as it occurred, O bull of Bharatas race!
Thus, O king, everything belongeth to those that are mighty.
The worship, therefore, O best of Brahmanas, that is offered to the best of ones power and exertion, should be acceptable!
These were the loud sounds that were heard then, O Bharata, among those troops.
I desire to hear this, O holy one, if thou hast seen the king (and knowest of his condition).
The time is come, O my sister, on account of which thou wert bestowed by me on Jaratkaru to protect us with our relatives.
Truly do I swear this by touching thy feet, O lord of the universe.
O, why also hath Suyodhana with his wives been thus punished?
Each perching separately from its neighbour, those crows slept at ease, O Kauravya!
For these reasons, O tiger among men, mustering all thy prowess and keeping the duties of a Kshatriya before thy eyes, proceed against Dhananjaya.
Or, perchance, O son, of Pritha, it is thy innate nature, by which thou art at present overpowered.
Kill this grief of thine, O chief of men.
7 Ashvatthama said, Sprung from Angirasas line, I am about to pour my soul, O god, as a libation on this fire!
O sire, Subalas son used to be then regarded as a politic person.
Similarly, all the Pandavas, having arrayed their troops in great battle, proceeded against the Kauravas, O king, for fighting with them on every side.
Then Kritavarma, O king, in that encounter, pierced the son of Prishata with seventy shafts all of which were equipped with wings of gold and whetted on stone.
His troops, O king of kings, accoutred in various kinds of mail and armed with diverse kinds of weapons, will wander on the field, slaying all the warriors opposed to them.
With great care, O king, we shall protect one another.
O scion of Purus race, the illustrious Vyasa of wisdom acquired by hard ascetic toil told me so in bygone days.
And Krisa replied, Even as king Parikshit was roving, for purpose of hunting, O dear one, he placed the dead snake on the shoulder of thy sire.
Replying unto her So be it,--Utanka departed, O Janamejaya, resolved to bring those ear-rings for doing what was agreeable to his preceptors wife.
O learned Brahmana, I solicit thee, bending my head, to explain to me what I ask.--Unto that disciple, O son of Pritha, who said so, the preceptor said,--O regenerate one, I shall explain to thee everything about which thou mayst have any doubts.--Thus addressed, O foremost one of Kurus race, by his preceptor, that disciple who was exceedingly devoted to his preceptor, spoke as follows, with joined hands.
Exertion is fruitless; fie on our exertions, O brother!
O lord, the discus owned by Vasudeva, of abundant energy, occupieth a space full five cubits in diameter, is capable also of being hurled at the foe (in forms large or small) according to the will of the wielder himself, and it dependeth on illusion.
Hearing these words of Dronas son, that were highly agreeable to his heart, the Kuru king addressing Kripa, said, O preceptor, bring me without delay a pot full of water!
Vidura replied,--O Yudhishthira, O bull of the Bharata race, know this to be my opinion, that one that is vanquished by sinful means need not be pained by such defeat.
This, O Satyabhama, hath ever been my charm for making my husbands obedient to me!
Regaining his senses then, O king, Sahadeva, filled with rage, covered Duryodhana with keen arrows.
I shall consider my life as not passed in vain if I succeed in beholding her once more, O king.
O Janardana, say it all unto us, exactly as it happened.
Beholding Dharmas son safe and sound with his younger brothers in battle, I will again fight with the foe, O thou of Vrishnis race.
Therefore, O Kshatriya, if the existence of desire, which is ignorance, is to be destroyed, no wish, not even the slightest one, is either to be thought of or pursued.
In that encounter of heroes, the combatants first eyed one another steadfastly, and then rushed, O king, and fell upon one another in hundreds and thousands.
Yudhishthira said, I salute thee, O invincible one.
Thou hadst, O fool, rejoiced greatly in the midst of the assembly, while gambling with dice!
The large armies of the Kurus and the Pandavas, O king, rising at sunrise, completed all their arrangements.
O Purandara, Nahusha hath been hurled from the throne of heaven.
Waited upon at one time by a large train of servants, and adored by her husbands with every object of enjoyment, the possessor of every auspicious mark and accomplishment, how, O Achyuta, is that Draupadi now?
Thereupon, O son of Pandu, he entered upon severe austerities, for (obtaining) a knowledge of the Vedas.
Vasudeva said,--behold, O Partha, the great capital of Magadha, standing in all its beauty.
His assailants, meanwhile, filled with rage, O monarch, endeavoured to afflict that mighty car-warrior of the Pandavas and checked other combatants (that tried to rescue him).
The boast in which thou hadst indulged in the midst of thy assembly is all vain, O Vrikodara!
I am, O king, a Muni who liveth on fruits and roots, though disguised as a deer.
Sakuni said,--Thou hast, O Yudhishthira, lost much wealth of the Pandavas.
I am here, O king, to slay that Bhima with all his followers, steeds, cars, and elephants, as also that son of Hidimva with friends.
Thus addressed, Mahadeva, with heart filled with joy, approached the dancing Rishi, and moved by the desire of doing good to the gods, said, O great Rishi, O virtuous one, why dost thou dance?
It is for this that I roar, O son of Gotama!
O king, I would have cursed thee if thou hadst not approached me thus!
Vyasa said, Thus told by that king, Narada, O mighty prince, made this reply to him with words which seemed to revive that son of Avikshit.
Vaisampayana said, Listen attentively, O king, purifying thyself and withdrawing thy mind from every other thing.
It is for this, O king, that I have come hither.
This, O monarch of Vaisampayana continued, After Drona had ceased, Karna spake again, Both Bhishma and Drona have been pampered with wealth that is thine and favours conferred by thee!
And those high-souled warriors shouted making the very earth tremble therewith, and grinding as it were, O sire, the hearts of thy sons.
What is this that thou hast, O monarch, desired to do?
Let Damayanti and all else that I have be my stake, let, O Pushkara, thy kingdom be thy stake.
Answer speedily, O Sudra, all these questions of mine.
Say all this unto me, O Sanjaya!
But, O bull of the Bharata race, listen to me, there is a stake of great value.
4 Sanjaya said, Beholding the fallen boxes of cars, as also the cars of high-souled warriors, and the elephants and foot-soldiers, O sire, slain in battle, seeing the field of battle assume an aspect as awful as that of the sporting ground of Rudra, observing the inglorious end obtained by hundreds and thousands of kings, witnessing also the prowess of Partha after the retreat of thy son with grief-stricken heart and when thy troops, filled with anxiety and fallen into great distress, O Bharata, were deliberating as to what they should next do, hearing also the loud wails of the Kaurava warriors that were being crushed, and marking the displayed and disordered tokens of great kings, the Kuru leader Kripa of great energy, possessed of years and good conduct and filled with compassion, and endued with eloquence, approached king Duryodhana, and angrily said these words unto him, O Duryodhana, listen, O Bharata, to these words that I will say unto thee.
It was at the time, O king, when the festival of Raivataka had begun, that he of eyes like lotus-petals arrived with Satyaki as his companion.
The thousand dishes they use for serving the food offered in hospitality and the edibles also they create at will, are all a mystery, The man, O Galava, that passeth beyond the point guarded by these Munis, is certain, O foremost of Brahmanas, to meet with destruction.
Saunaka said, Child, thy father formerly read the whole of the Puranas, O son of Lomaharshana, and the Bharata with Krishna-Dwaipayana.
Do thou, O best of Brahmanas, remove this fear of Indra from my mind.
Sanjaya said, ‘The kings of diverse peoples, that came from diverse realms, have all, O king, gone to the regions of the dead, along with thy sons.
Some of them were in youth; some were old and some, O Janamejaya, were very young in years.
It behoveth thee, O monarch, to grant me permission!
Vaisampayana continued--Then the ruler of Chedis, having heard these words of Bhishma, addressed the latter, O Bharata, in words that were stern and rough.
And, O scion of Bharatas race!
O Kunti.
(Behold, O Krishna, so far from doing all this), though born in a high race, they are yet destitute of the very means of support, and are afflicted with misery.
Bhishma said, O great king, the eldest and beloved queen of king Drupada was, O monarch, childless (at first).
I do not, like Shakuni, feel any compassion for thee, O king, for such words as these!
Therefore, O king, myself who am pure, and have my senses under control, beg to thee, O monarch, thy daughter as my daughter-in-law.
Even if the Kauravas express their desire for peace with the Pandavas, still, O thou of Dasarhas race, provoke thou a war with them.
Nor will he, O tiger among men, brook these leonine shouts (of ours).
A Kshatriya, O Sanjaya, hath been created for battle and victory.
Conversant with all duties he then asked the Rishi Vaisampayana of unfading glory about the sequel, O best of ascetics, of king Dhritarashtras residence in the woods.
But, O thou of slender waist, thou must act even as thou hast said.
And, O most praiseworthy of the sons of Manu!
Thou wielder of the thunder, the protector of the universe, the slayer of Vritra and Namuchi, thou illustrious one who wearest the black cloth and displayest truth and untruth in the universe, thou who ownest for thy carrier the horse which was received from the depths of the ocean, and which is but another form of Agni (the god of fire), I bow to thee, thou supreme Lord, thou Lord of the three worlds, O Purandara!
O exalted one, this kind of prosperity of mine doth not gratify me.
Thou hast, therefore, once more allowed a wretched game of chance to commence as that one in former days between thyself and Shakuni, O monarch!
While sitting at the root of a tree, his thoughts, O thou of great intelligence, abandoning all those great feats, turned towards that which is subtle.
These, O king, are the indications of armies to be crowned with victory, while O monarch, all these become otherwise in the case of those that are about to be destroyed.
At that time, O Brahmana sage, Viswavasu, the King of the Gandharvas, it is said, had intimacy with Menaka, the celestial dancing-girl.
If, however, stationed in battle, I shoot my great weapons that slay hundreds and thousands at a time, then I can, O Bharata, finish the slaughter in a month.
Then Yudhishthira beholding Bhima in rage, said, O Bhima, O tiger among men, however enraged, do not slay a woman.
O thou of incomparable prowess, O king of the Madras, for the destruction of the foe, I solicit thee today, with humility and bow of the head.
O king, the Pandavas only did their duty in liberating thee.
O thou of unfading glory, listen now to the details of the awful carnage that has occurred.
After some time had passed away, some Rishis, possessed of wealth of asceticism, came to the Sarasvati, O king, on a sojourn to her tirthas.
Baffling those arrows sped by Subalas son with showers of shafts, the valiant Sahadeva, O monarch, cut off his antagonists bow in that battle.
O Bharata, no one should despair saying, Oh, I am acting, yet success is not mine!
And when all had sat down, Salya spoke to Yudhishthira, the son of Kunti, saying, O tiger among kings, O thou delighter of the race of Kuru, is it all well with thee?
Bows decked with ornaments of gold, and shafts equipped with beautiful wings of pure gold, and bright unsheathed rapiers of excellent temper, and lances, and scimitars bright as gold, and umbrellas, and fans, and conchs, and arms decked with excellent flowers and gold, and caparisons of elephants, and standards, and car fences and diadems, and necklaces, and brilliant crowns, and yak-tails lying about, O king, and garlands luminous with corals and pearls, and chaplets for the head, and bracelets for both the wrist and the upper arms, and collars for the neck with strings of gold, and diverse kinds of costly diamonds and gems and pearls, and bodies brought up in a great luxury, and heads beautiful as the moon, are lying scattered about.
Utanka said, I know thee, O Janarddana, to be the creator of the universe.
(And when everything was complete) Yaja, after having poured libations of clarified butter on the sacrificial fire, commanded Drupadas queen, saying, Come hither, O queen, O daughter-in-law of Prishata!
The man that is not acquainted with those rulings becomes confounded and stupefied, O Partha, even as thou hast been stupefied, in discriminating between what should be done and what should not.
And, O bull of the Bharata race, the city of the Matsya king, thronged with men cheerful and well-fed, shone brightly like a great festival.
O monarch, when Mahadeva had become angry, the whole world had thus become agitated: when he became gratified everything became safe.
The eloquent grandson of Karandhama, (Marutta) having conceived the idea of a sacrifice in his mind, went to Vrihaspati and addressed him thus, O worshipful ascetic, I have intended to perform the sacrifice which thou didst propose to me once on a previous occasion and in accordance with thy instructions, and I now desire to appoint thee as officiating priest in this sacrifice, the materials whereof have also been collected by me.--O excellent one, thou art our family priest, therefore do thou take those sacrificial things and perform the sacrifice thyself.
Duryodhana said, That slayer of hostile heroes, Arjuna, then approaching Chitrasena, smilingly addressed him in these manly words: O hero, O foremost of the Gandharvas, it behoveth thee to set my brothers at liberty.
In consequence of his wasting, O Lord of the celestials, all creatures also are wasting!
Therefore, O thou parasite, why dost thou obstruct us so?
He is eagerly desirous also, O king, of making good his vow, O Bharata!
And that prince of Asuras received them hospitably, entertaining them, O son of the Kuru race, with well dressed meat supplied by his brother Vatapi (transformed into a ram).
We then, O king, witnessed the lightness of hand displayed by the high-souled Karna and the power of his weapons.
Then thy warriors, O king, rushed towards Dhrishtadyumna, uttering loud leonine roars.
O foremost of kings, thyself cause thy own self to be installed in the command as Pavakas son Kartikeya in the command of (the forces of) the celestials.
Like the sacrifice of Yama, of Harimedha, or of king Rantideva, is the sacrifice of thine, O foremost one of Bharatas race, O son of Parikshit.
Save, O king, the world.
I would not, O son, grieve but feel greatly happy, if my daughter hath been united with Partha that foremost of men!
The sons of Pandu then, O great king, made up their minds for war, and passed that night with their soldiers in great happiness.
Cherishing the hope in his heart that after the fall of Bhishma and Drona, Karna would vanquish the Pandavas, and comforted (by it), O Bharata, Duryodhana then, filled with joy at having heard those words of Ashvatthama, steadying his mind and relying on the might of his arms, said unto Radhas son, O monarch, these words that were fraught with affection and regard, and that were true, delightful, and beneficial to himself: O Karna, I know thy prowess, and the great friendship thou bearest to me!
Listen now to me, O son of Kunti, as I tell thee of other woes far surpassing these.
Desirous of attaining to that which constitutes the highest good, I throw myself at thy feet, O holy one.
Bhimasena also, O king, impelled by a heart that seemed to be wicked, was unable to put up with king Dhritarashtra.
Kanwa continued, Hearing the proud words of that bird foreshadowing danger the bearer of the discus, provoking Tarkshya still more, said unto him, Though so very weak, why dost thou, O Garuda, yet regard thyself strong, O oviparous creature, it ill behoveth thee to vaunt thus in our presence.
Beholding that Brahmana observant of vows thus engaged in battle (with another), Shikhandi, O best of kings, retreated hastily from that spot.
And that child, O worst of kings, shall be the perpetuator of thy race.
So untold was the wealth, O great king!
27 Sanjaya said, Duryodhana, O king, and thy son Sudarsa, the only two of thy children yet unslain, were at that time in the midst of the (Kaurava) cavalry.
Therefore, O king, it behoveth thee to desist from such acts!
Protected by that car, that hero, that brave crusher of foes (Shalya), stood, O monarch, dispelling the fears of thy sons.
And how, O twice-born one, did he obtain so much gold?
Therefore, O king, prosecute not the Pandavas from desire of profit, even like the king in story.
And the sons of Pandu, O king, worshipping that bull of Bharatas race, and bowing unto him with their heads, sought his protection.
How shall I be able, O Sanjaya, to endure the words of Bhima who hath single-handed slain a full hundred sons of mine?
Equal to thee in importance is that car, O god, and Hara is the warrior.
Therefore, O Parasara, establish thou peace.
Janamejaya said, After Karna had thus been slain in battle by Savyasaci, what did the small (unslaughtered) remnant of the Kauravas do, O regenerate one?
If thou, O mother be killed, we can have no more children in our race.
O child, sons and servants and attendants and even strangers speak harsh words unto the man who always forgiveth.
Then Dhritarashtra, once more addressing Yudhishthira, said these words, Do thou, O king, grant me permission to practise penances.
Dhritarashtra said, Tell me, O Sanjaya, what counsel was adopted by the Pandavas for the protection of Dhrishtadyumna when they saw the Kauravas once more advance to battle, rallied by Dronas son who was scorched by grief and unable to brook the slaughter of his sire?
Everywhere, O king, Brahmanas were promptly gratified with whatever viands they desired.
I also tell thee truly that I will cast off my arms in battle, having heard something very disagreeable from some one of credible speech.-- Sanjaya continued, Hearing these words, O king, of the wise son of Bharadwaja, and honouring the preceptor, (Yudhishthira then) proceeded towards the son of Saradwat.
But O Bharata, I desire to do something for thee cheerfully.
And, O monarch, the king then took counsel with ministers for the proper protection of his subjects (from the would-be invader).
Then, O king, the citizens, my auspicious mother Kali herself, our servants, the priests and the preceptors (of our house), and many Brahmanas of great learning, all afflicted with great woe, solicited me to occupy the throne.
Asked by me, O Sanjaya, say which of the parties, when engaged in battle, will perish?
O faultless one, I can forsake myself but thee I cannot forsake.
Then Duryodhana, O monarch, filled with great delight, caused diverse musical instruments to be beaten and blown in all parts of the army.
Thou art a princess by birth; over this, thou art, again, very delicate, O beautiful dame!
Relent, O mother, O thou of great fame, do not go into the woods now.
This is my sister, O Partha, and the uterine sister of Sarana.
O tiger among men, hearing of the fate that overtook Kunti, the world doth not regard Purochana so guilty as it regardeth thee.
A jackal, O Karna, residing in the forest in the midst of hares regardeth himself a lion till he actually sees a lion.
O best of Adharyus, it behoveth thee to tell me everything relating to this!
When, O son of Kuru, thou art alive, and Drona, that foremost of persons conversant with weapons, along with his son and with all our other friends (is alive), and then that mighty bowman Kripa also is alive, I do not regard it as at all creditable that my army should thus fly away.
The Gandharva continued, There was, O Partha, a king in this world, named Kalmashapada, who was of the race of Ikshvaku and was unequalled on earth for prowess.
Whatever Brahmana or Kshatriya solicited whatever thing, that O Bharata, it was seen to be ungrudgingly given to him.
Having abandoned thy brothers and Krishna, thou hast, O hero, acquired a region of felicity by thy own deeds.
One day, those two listlessly proceeded to a particular part of the palace that looked, O king, like a veritable portion of Heaven.
If the refuge is broken, O sire, everything inhering thereto is scattered on every side.
If the Pandavas are slaughtered in battle, or if thy own mighty sons fall, tell me, O bull of Bharatas race, what happiness wilt thou enjoy?
Arise, O prince, and fight, casting off thy fears!
O thou withstander of all foes, igniting the sacred fire, take thou her hand with due rites.
Dismissed by Dhritarashtras son, Krishna returned (to the Pandava camp), and upon the failure of his mission, O tiger among kings, said these words unto the Pandavas, Urged by Fate, the Kauravas are for disregarding my words!
2 Kripa said, We have heard all that thou hast said, O puissant one!
But Maitreya said, O king, if thy son concludeth peace with the Pandavas, this curse of mine, O child, will not take effect, otherwise it must be as I have said!
And the high-souled Rishi set his heart, O child, upon the destruction of every creature in the world.
Vaisampayana said, It was, O lord of earth, on the first day of the lighted fortnight during the tenth month of the year that Pritha conceived a son like the lord himself of the stars in the firmament.
Then Suketu, the son of Citraketu, O king, quickly proceeded towards the mighty Shikhandi plunged into such distress and assailed in that manner by Kripa with his arrows.
O Janarddana, both Abhimanyu and myself have been equally slain.
Hearing these words, Hidimva said, What need is there, O man, for this thy vaunt and this thy boast?
Therefore, O thou of mighty arms, desist from thy purpose.
Their terrible encounter, O Rama, will take place today!
Draupadi said,--O best of kings, O illustrious one, covetousness always bringeth about loss of virtue.
And, O son of the Kuru race, it is by good luck alone, that I am enabled to see thy brothers-- mighty warriors all--come off victorious from that encounter, having subjugated their foes!
I strike, however, at that Kshatriyahood which thou, O Rama, hast adopted!
And Bhimasena, then, O Bharata, supported by the Chedis, rushed towards that large and mighty army of the Kalingas, abounding with cars, steeds, and elephants, and armed with mighty weapons, and advancing towards him with Ketumat, the son of the king of the Nishadas.
Do not grieve, O bull of Bharatas race.
My heart is yearning after similar observances My soul will be in torment if I see him not, Vibhandaka said, Those are, O son!
O thou of excellent vows without any reason thou speakest ill of all the Pandavas!
Therefore, O king, I ask for thy friendship again.
Thy venerable father, O wife, and thy mother also, have, a long time ago, ascended to heaven.
The people (of Valaramas train) gave away vehicles to persons desirous of making journeys, drinks to them that were thirsty, and savoury viands to them that were hungry, as also robes and ornaments, O bull of Bharatas race, to many!
Armed with weapons, all of them, O monarch, hung down their heads.
O tiger among men, thy main army, under such circumstances, can with difficulty be united; far greater will the difficulty be in uniting an army gathered from various provinces!
Afflicted by the god of love, I will, O beauteous damsel, alone repair to thy abode for union with thee, O thou of thighs round and tapering like the trunks of the plantain,--so that those Gandharvas, effulgent as the sun, may not come to know of this act of thine.
Uluka then, that delighter of his father, jumping down from his car, O king, quickly proceeded and entered the division of the Trigartas.
O mighty-armed one.
If, O hero, I had met with my death in that great battle, that would have been far better than that I should have obtained my life in this way.
Dhritarashtra said, What did Duryodhana next do, O Suta, when the hearts of all of you turned towards Vikarnas son Karna?
Therefore, it behoveth thee now to banish, by some gentle means, the Pandavas to the town of Varanavata; O king, when the sovereignty shall have been vested in me, then, O Bharata, may Kunti with her children come back from that place.
I adore thee also, to obtain the ear-rings, O Takshaka, who formerly dwelt in Kurukshetra and the forest of Khandava!
O king, he that behaveth falsely towards those that live and conduct themselves righteously, certainly cutteth down his own self, like a forest with an axe.
All this, O best of men.
O son, all these maidens are of course of blue blood.
O blessed maiden, we are now going to him.
O great king, drink thou that which the honest drink and the dishonest shun, even humility, which is like a medicine that is bitter, pungent, burning, unintoxicating, disagreeable, and revolting.
Having with his shafts crushed Drona himself and Kritavarman of the Bhoja race, this Satyaki cometh to thee, O Phalguna!
Vaisampayana continued, The son of Dhritarashtra, O chastiser of foes, having said this, Bhishma and Drona and Kripa and Dronas son all applauded his manliness!
Everything, therefore, seems to me to be fraught with danger, and my mind is full of anxiety, O thou of great intelligence, tell me such words as may dispel my anxiety.
All the purposes of human acts, O bull among men, are accomplished by the aid of those two together.
Then the prince, O sire, cut off Kripas bow with arrow fixed thereon, and with another shaft struck hard the latters driver in a vital limb.
Arjuna, O king, is invincible in battle, if Bhima protecteth him from behind.
And the women said, Let the victory that Arjuna treading like a bull had achieved of old on the occasion of burning the forest of Khandava, be thine, O Vrihannala, when thou encounterest the Kurus today with prince Uttara.
Vidura said, It was thus, O lord of men, that Kirmira was slain in combat by Bhima, in obedience, O Kaurava, to the commands of Yudhishthira the just!
Kritavarman, in that battle, covered with his arrows that mighty Sanjaya said, Thy men, O bull of Bharatas race, exert themselves according to the measure of their might and courage, and display their valour to the utmost extent of their strength.
Vaishampayana said, A great enmity arose between Vishvamitra and Vasishtha, O Bharata, due to their rivalry in respect of ascetic austerities.
O king, if thou resolvest to slay thyself by forgoing food, thou wilt simply be an object of laughter with other kings.
If thou think it proper to accept my words, do thou then, O best of men, rest here, partaking of fruits and roots, sweet as ambrosia, and do not have thyself destroyed for naught.
the Pandavas and the Srinjayas they found not a protector, O bull of Bharatas race.
When the earth was thus shrouded with dust and when darkness covered everything, thy troops, O king, fled on all sides from fear.
Beholding that feat of Salwa, the Pancalas, the Srinjayas, and the Matsyas, O king, uttered loud cries of Oh!
Who, O charioteer, having got the other alternative would wish to fight?
O Vidura, do thou say it, if indeed, thou hast that degree of wisdom.
And, O Bharata, beholding such superhuman feats of mine, the servants of the royal household will honour me as a king.
Vaishampayana said, Formerly, in the Krita age, O king, the ascetics dwelling in Naimisha were engaged in a grand sacrifice extending for twelve years.
Thou art incapable, O son of Pritha, of being swerved from thy nature or reason.
In the name of truth I swear, O goddess, that I shall do thy bidding.
Therefore, O king, I should certainly seek their good as well, although I shall certainly fight for thee, having given thee a pledge (before) to that effect.
I will give him a century of handsome maid-servants of the complexion of gold, all virgins, and man-servants I will give him as, Vidura said, O monarch, O best of men, thou art respected by three worlds.
Thus addressed by Pandus son of great force of mind, he of Dasarhas race urged his steeds, O king, towards the division of Duryodhana.
Duly disposing his own troops in counter-array, O bull of Bharatas race, that hero of great energy made a great slaughter of the Pandava forces like Maghavat slaughtering the Asura host.
Then thy sire, the Kuru hero, whose bow had thus been cut off, stringed another large bow within the twinkling of the Sanjaya said, While they were battling, the Sun set, O Bharata, aid there came the dreadful hour of twilight and the battle could no longer be seen.
Lomasa said, Saying this, O mighty son of Kunti, the highly virtuous king cut off a portion of his own flesh, and placed it in a balance, against the pigeon.
O my son, there is a current anecdote narrated by the gods.
Bhima said, Behold, O Suta, today this awful battle in which everything will be shrouded with my impetuous arrows sped fiercely from my bow and, mangling all my foes, and in consequence of which the very sun will disappear from the field, making the latter resemble the domains of Death!
Utanka, said, O thou whose handiwork is the universe, I bow to thee, O Soul of the universe, O parent of all things.
And the king said, Thou shall, O gentle maid, act even thus, without fear, for my good as also thy own, and for the good of thy race also, O thou of faultless limbs!
Deprived of life, O monarch, Susarman fell down on the Earth, gladdening all the Pandavas and paining all thy warriors.
Bhishma said, O king, O son of Kurus race, what aid can I render thee in this?
And engaging in fight with lions and elephants, I shall, O sinless one, always contribute to thy entertainment.
At his death, O chastiser of foes, that kingdom must pass to his sons.
Satyaki said, The high-souled Sahadeva, O thou of mighty arms, hath spoken the truth.
Reflecting upon both these calamities, the time hath come for thee, O mother, to do that which is beneficial to our race.
Thus, O great king, that river serveth all purposes.
What man is there, O bull of Bharatas race, who can venture to vanquish thee, scattering showers of arrows in battle, and causing a great destruction.
May I, O lord, always conquer covetousness and folly and anger, and may my mind be ever devoted to charity, truth, and ascetic austerities!
It is time, O hero, I think, for pacifying her!
And having spoken thus unto the king, Dussasana began to weep melodiously catching, O Bharata, the feet of his eldest brother deserving of worship from him.
Samvarta said, I can certainly, O king, accomplish all that thou desirest, if only thou agree to do all that I shall ask thee to do, but I apprehend that Vrihaspati and Purandara (Indra) when they will learn that I am engaged in performing thy sacrifice, will be filled with wrath, and do all they can to injure thee.
O son, hath that wreath of flowers been thrown away on a grave-yard?
Duryodhana, O king, said these words to Dussasana,--O Dussasana, let cars be speedily directed for the protection of Bhishma, Sanjaya said,--When the night had passed away, loud became the noise made by the kings, all exclaiming, Array!
Save, O king, these monarchs, who are all of pure descent, endued with modesty and liberality and piety, and connected with on another in bonds of relationship or alliance, from the terrible danger that threatens them.
The innocent Nandini then began, O Partha, to low piteously, and approaching the illustrious Vasishtha stood before him with uplifted face.
The earth may split, the vault of heaven may break in pieces, the sun may cast off his splendour, the moon may abandon his coolness, the wind may forsake its speed, the Himavat may be moved from its site, the waters of the ocean may dry up, and fire may abandon its heat, yet I, O king, may never rule the earth without thee.
Today I will reach the end of these hostilities that is difficult to reach, with the aid, O tiger among men, of my mace wrapped with cloth of gold.
Many were dark in colour and many, O king, were of diverse colours, O Bharata.
These, O chief, and other Rajas, we hear enumerated by hundreds and by thousands, and still others by millions, princes of great power and wisdom, quitting very abundant enjoyments met death as thy sons have done!
Great is the advantage in peace, O king, both to thyself and Yudhishthira.
And there also arose, O king, the noise of neighing steeds and grunting elephants, and the fierce clatter of car-wheels.
Shalya answered, I will, O king of the Kurus, accomplish that which thou askest me to accomplish.
For this reason, O son of Gandhari, forsake vanity and wrath, O hero, make peace with the sons of Pandu.
Struck and mangled repeatedly with swords and battle axes and lances, thy warriors, as also the Pandavas, O Bharata, ceased to approach one another.
And O king, the attendants of Kuvera, desirous of doing good to him, protect these mines of gold from intruders, with uplifted arms.
It behoveth thee, O son of Pritha, to tell me all, if, indeed, there be no harm in telling it.
And, O thou bull of the Bharata race, Pulastya then, seeing that many Rakshasas had already been slain, told these words unto Parasara that oppressor of all enemies: There is no obstruction, I hope, to this sacrifice of thine, O child!
O puissant one, I know that the hunger of children is very strong.
And, O bull among men, compass thou thy own good as also of the Pandavas, of the Kurus and of the world!
Or let this wicked son of thine, O monarch, along and unaccompanied, himself go to the forest and live with the sons of Pandu.
Thou knowest, O Yudhishthira, that gamesters, while excited with play, utter such ravings that they never indulge in the like of them in their waking moments nor even in dream.
Ashvatthama said, With thyself among all men, O holy one, I shall live!
Saluting and propitiating thee, the Pandavas have said unto thee, At thy face, O king, without seeking to disregard thee.
The bull of the Bharata race, having presented the whole of that wealth unto king Yudhisthira the just regarded himself, O Janamejaya, as crowned with success and continued to live happily.
O thou of mighty arms, I am unable to act as thy priest now.
And then, O king, while falling down deprived of life, his blazing scimitar and shield, loosened from his grasp, fell down with his body on the ground.
And the grandsire, having thus broken the ranks of the Pandavas at last withdrew his troops and retired, O king, to his encampment.
Devoted to Duryodhanas good, know that I have cast off my life (for him).--Hearing these words (of Karna), Krishna ceased, O Bharata, and reunited himself with the sons of Pandu headed by Yudhishthira.
Meanwhile, when Arjuna will not be by, O monarch, I will seize king Yudhishthira the just, penetrating through the Pandava host in the very sight of Dhrishtadyumna.
O, diminish this thy body resembling Agni.
If, therefore, O thou of mature wisdom, thou seest any means (by which all this can be effected), speak fully of it to me as I ask thee, for I shall do all that thou mayst command me to do.
Nor it is proper, O son of Pritha, and conqueror of thy foes, that thou shouldst recall the incident of Kichakas kicking Draupadi, during the period of thy exile passed in absolute concealment, nor the incidents of the fight which took place between thyself and Drona and Bhishma.
Endued with great intelligence, Madhava once more addressed the son of Dharma, saying, O Yudhishthira, it behoveth thee to comfort Vibhatsu, and command him to slaughter Karna of wicked soul.
Behold, O lotus-eyed hero, their beautiful faces resembling full-blown lotuses, are scorched by the sun.
After, O monarch, that best of cars had thus been constructed by the gods, O tiger among men, for grinding their foes, Sankara placed upon it his own celestial weapons.
And, O Pushkara, choose thou one of these two things--gambling with dice or bending the bow in battle!
O king when the state of my mind is such, what do I care now for life, for the Pandavas are daily growing while our possessions know no increase?
O father, I tell thee (a curse) can never be otherwise.
When thou art present, O Brahmana, the art of the Asuras will never be able to vanquish, the science of the Brahmana.
Yudhishthira said O them of mighty arms, it is even so.
7 Sanjaya said, Hearing these words of the (Kuru) king, the valiant monarch (Shalya), O king, said these words unto Duryodhana in reply, O mighty-armed Duryodhana, listen to me, O foremost of eloquent men.
Neither the sons of Pandu, O king, nor their troops, nor they that follow them, nor the Kauravas, show the least regard for their lives in battle.
If, however, O lord, this tiger among men, Satyajit, be slain in battle, thou shouldst not then remain on the field even if surrounded by all our warriors.
Having thrown down Shakuni from his car, the Pandavas, O Bharata, became filled with delight.
Thou, O holy one, art my father.
Filled with rage, the son of Radha then slew Jishnu, and Jishnukarman, and Devapi, O king, in that battle, and Citra, and Citrayudha, and Hari, and Singhaketu and Rochamana and the great car-warrior Salabha, and many car-warriors among the Cedis bathed the form of Adhirathas son in blood, while he himself was engaged in taking the lives of those heroes.
What foe is there, O wretch, that would venture to vanquish me armed with this weapon?
O grandsire, listen to what I say, O Bharata.
And they seated themselves round about Yudhishthira, as round Indra, O king!
Bhima, in that battle, filled with rage, O ruler of men, made thy son Sudarsana invisible with his arrows, and smiling the while, cut off from his antagonists trunk his head with a razor-headed arrow of great sharpness.
Sanjaya continued, Thus addressed by Vasudeva, Pandus son of rigid vows, smiling the while, addressed, O monarch, thy son of great might, who, O Bharata, was then within the waters of that lake, saying, Why, O Suyodhana, hast thou entered these waters, after having caused all the Kshatriyas to perish and after having, O king, caused thy own race to be annihilated?
And in consequence of various carnivorous creatures, O tiger among men, roaring and yelling on all sides, the field of battle became terrible like the domains of the king of the dead.
Through thy own fault this great calamity has come upon thee, due to avarice and pride and folly, O Bharata!
Possessed of immeasurable intelligence, the modest Vidura then, in the presence of the Pandavas and Keshava, addressed the well-behaved Drupada thus: With thy ministers and sons, O monarch, listen to what I say.
Thus, O king, have I recited to thee all about the incarnation, according to their respective portions, of the gods, the Asuras, the Gandharvas, the Apsaras, and of the Rakshasas.
Krishna here engaged himself in a life of penances, O Pandus son.
Vaisampayana said, When, O mighty king, in this manner the Pandavas had gone, leaving Suyodhana, and when, having been liberated by Pandus sons, he had come to Hastinapura, Bhishma said these words to the son of Dhritarashtra, O child, I had told thee before, when thou wert intent upon going to the hermitage that thy journey did not please me.
I grant thee also, O hero, this (other) wish of thy heart, that if thou slayest any of us, thou shalt then become king!
Then thy race, therefore, O king, is so noble, it would be a pity if anything improper were done by any one belonging to it, and greater pity still if it were done by thee.
He caused, O sire, a great carnage among the Srinjayas, the Pancalas, the Kekayas, and the Videhas.
Yudhishthira said, O eminently virtuous one, O mighty sage, of the bestowal of gifts and the observance of asceticism, which is of greater efficacy in the next world, and which, harder of practice?
Behold, O king, the residence of that noble-hearted monarch.
O Bhishma.
They are the Kuru-Panchalas, the Salwas, the Madreyas, the Jangalas, the Surasena, the Kalingas, the Vodhas, the Malas, the Matsyas, the Sauvalyas, the Kuntalas, the Kasi-kosalas, the Chedis, the Karushas, the Bhojas, the Sindhus, the Pulindakas, the Uttamas, the Dasarnas, the Mekalas, the Utkalas; the Panchalas, the Kausijas, the Nikarprishthas, Dhurandharas; the Sodhas, the Madrabhujingas, the Kasis, and the further-Kasis; the Jatharas, the Kukuras, O Bharata; the Kuntis, the Avantis, and the further-Kuntis; the Gomantas, the Mandakas, the Shandas, the Vidarbhas, the Rupavahikas; the Aswakas, the Pansurashtras, the Goparashtras, and the Karityas; the Adhirjayas, the Kuladyas, the Mallarashtras, the Keralas, the Varatrasyas, the Apavahas, the Chakras, the Vakratapas, the Sakas; the Videhas, the Magadhas, the Swakshas, the Malayas, the Vijayas, the Angas, the Vangas, the Kalingas, the Yakrillomans; the Mallas, the Suddellas, the Pranradas, the Mahikas, the Sasikas; the Valhikas, the Vatadhanas, the Abhiras, the Kalajoshakas; the Aparantas, the Parantas, the Pahnabhas, the Charmamandalas; the Atavisikharas, the Mahabhutas, O sire; the Upavrittas, the Anupavrittas, the Surashatras, Kekayas; the Kutas, the Maheyas, the Kakshas, the Samudranishkutas; the Andhras, and, O king, many hilly tribes, and many tribes residing on lands laying at the foot of the hills, and the Angamalajas, and the Manavanjakas; the Pravisheyas, and the Bhargavas, O king; the Pundras, the Bhargas, the Kiratas, the Sudeshnas, and the Yamunas, the Sakas, the Nishadhas, the Anartas, the Nairitas, the Durgalas, the Pratimasyas, the Kuntalas, and the Kusalas; the Tiragrahas, the Ijakas, the Kanyakagunas, the Tilabharas, the Samiras, the Madhumattas, the Sukandakas; the Kasmiras, the Sindhusauviras, the Gandharvas, and the Darsakas; the Abhisaras, the Utulas, the Saivalas, and the Valhikas; the Darvis, the Vanavadarvas, the Vatagas, the Amarathas, and the Uragas; the Vahuvadhas, the Kauravyas, the Sudamanas, the Sumalikas; the Vadhras, the Karishakas, the Kalindas, and the Upatyakas; the Vatayanas, the Romanas, and the Kusavindas; the Kacchas, the Gopalkacchas, the Kuruvarnakas; the Kiratas, the Varvasas, the Siddhas, the Vaidehas, and the Tamraliptas; the Aundras, the Paundras, the Saisikatas, and the Parvatiyas, O sire.
Then Arjuna, beholding Bhima rather oppressed in the fight by the Rakshasa, slowly, said with smiles on his lips, Fear not, O Bhima of mighty arms!
Vaisampayana said,--thus addressed, Bhima firmly resolved upon slaying Jarasandha, replied unto Krishna of the Yadu race, saying,--O tiger of the Then the son of Jarasandha, the high-souled Sahadeva, accompanied by his relatives and the principal officers of state, and with his priest in front came thither.
If thou dost not act, O sire, according to the words of the high-souled Kesava, neither prosperity, nor happiness nor what is for thy good, wilt thou ever have.
The noise of diverse musical instrument arose then, O king, and the leonine shouts of brave warriors rent the sky.
Then, O chastiser of foes, the army of Duryodhana broke.
Indeed, O mighty-armed one go forth but try to establish friendly relations with them.
If thou, O king, dost not act according to my words I shall stay here employed in reverentially serving thy feet.
Rise up, O Madri, and yield me his body.
Rather, O foremost of the Bharata a race, I am pleased with him; nay,--even before coming here, I had been gratified with this deed of Bhima.
The Pandavas also, O monarch, proceeded towards our encampment.
Making that king the commander of our forces, O best of monarchs, we will be able to gain victory, like the gods, after making the unvanquished Skanda their commander.
O Kanika, advise me truly, for I shall do as thou biddest.
Then Vasudeva of Dasarhas race, and Janamejaya said, Having heard these words, O regenerate one, that were spoken by the high-souled Vyasa in respect of the horse-sacrifice, what steps were taken by Yudhishthira?
By rendering obedient service to my father-in-law and mother-in-law both of whom wish to take up their abode in the woods, and by penances, I desire, O Yudhishthira, to waste my body.
Thou, however, O amiable maiden, hast practised severer penances!
And as a consequence, O hero, wert thou forcibly taken captive by the enemy, and wert delivered by the Pandavas versed in morality.
Listen to it, O Baladeva!
Loosening the animal according to the injunctions of the scriptures, let him wander over the whole Earth with her belt of seas, displaying thy blazing glory, O king!
Truly death shall approach thee, O sinless one, having first obtained thy command.
The mighty-armed Karna alone is devoted to our good, as also thyself, O tiger among men, that art the foremost of car-warriors in the whole world.
And that chastiser of foes, Sauri, who had his car ready, was about to depart, king Dhritarashtra addressed him once more and said, O grinder of foes, thou hast seen, O Janardana, the power I wield over my sons!
Soon Karna shrouded the ten points of the compass, O king, with arrows capable of piercing the bodies of foes, as if with advancing flights of locusts.
Agni said, Thou, O Sakra, hast encompassed the dominion of the heaven and the earth and the firmament by the might of thy own arms, but even thus how could Vritra (of old) wrest from thee the sovereignty of the celestial regions?
Son killed sire, and sire killed son, O Bharata.
And the son of thy son, with a view to purifying the sons of Sagara, will obtain the favour of the great god Siva, (by means of practising great austerities), and will (thus) bring (to this world) the river that floweth in three (separate) streams, Ganga, O chief of men!
Save thee, O Sutas son, there is no other man, O hero, that can, in battle, dispel the fears of those retreating combatants.
But I succeeded not, O Karna, in the task!
The mighty car-warrior Satanika, however, staying on his steedless car, O sire, hurled a mace, filled with rage, at thy son.
There, in that sacred tirtha of the Sarasvati, the illustrious Garga of venerable years and soul cleansed by ascetic penances, O Janamejaya, had acquired a knowledge of Time and its course, of the deviations of luminous bodies (in the firmament), and of all auspicious and inauspicious portents.
Even in the presence of thee, O son of Gandhari, together with thy army, did the Sutas son, struck with panic, fly from the battle of the Gandharvas, O king.
Therefore, O Brahmana, I am not surprised at what thou doest.
The whole universe, O king, dependeth upon virtue.
And since the adorable child had been cast by the river Ganga upon the summit of Himavat, that mountain looked beautiful, having, O delighter of the Kurus, been transformed into gold!
Bhishma said, I do not see the person, O sire, who can vanquish me in battle.
They that remain, O mighty-armed one, are feeble, equal, as I think, to straw!
But being made a friend, and asked by thee, O friend, I will answer thee, although self-praise without reason is ever improper.
Listen, O Yudhishthira, to the reasons urged by Avindhya!
The deities all saluted him, O monarch, and many foremost of Munis and Rishis worshipped him who was the Lord of all.
O slayer of foes, the heroic sons of Pandu are thy uterine brothers!
O king, O bull of the Bharata race, hearing those words of Karna, that lord of men, experiencing the highest delight, spoke unto Karna, saying, I am blessed.
O grandsire of the Kurus, thou givest not thy foes even a minute hole to pick in thee.
Vaisampayana continued While mother and son were thus talking with each other, they heard again, O king, another wail of sorrow proceeding from the Brahmana and his wife.
Then Narada addressing him thus said,--O royal sage, thou seemest to be not well-pleased in thy mind; is all well with thee?
Know, O chastiser of foes, that my heart is no longer inclined to curse thee.
Let thy fears, therefore, O bull of the Bharata race, be all dispelled.
The high-souled Karna, the son of Kunti, incapable of being baffled in battle, Dhrishtadyumna, Satyaki, the sons of Dhrishtadyumna and those other Kshatriyas who met with death in the observance of Kshatriya practices, where are those lords of Earth, O Brahmana?
The people then said, True it is, O king, that, that son who is accomplished and who seeketh the good of his parents, deserveth prosperity even if he be the youngest.
Then, O best of Brahmanas, the embryo endued with great splendour, began to develop, like the moon in the heavens in the bright fortnight.
Today, O Govinda, thou shalt behold Karna crushed by me like a tree with its load of flowers crushed by an infuriated elephant.
O powerful one, on thy having become our protector, the Pandavas have found help.
And the childs mother, of superior complexion, then urged the king (her husband) to find, O monarch, a wife for her, as if she were a son.
When fallen into terrible distress or when visited by great prosperity, the understanding of a person, O chief of the Bhojas, is seen to be much afflicted.
Sakuntala then replied, Hear, O king, what I have learnt regarding all that befell me of old and how I became the daughter of the Muni.
The Sarashas were heard to imitate the hooting of the owl, and goats imitated the cries, O Bharata, of jackals.
After Vasudeva had departed, O king, Vyasa, that adored of the whole world, of inconceivable soul, began to comfort king Dhritarashtra.
I shall, O Kauravya, do all that thou hast commended me to do.
But, O sire, there is one endowment which alone can cause all these attributes to come together; the fact is, when the king honoureth a particular person, the royal favour can cause all these attributes to shed their lustre (on the favourite).
And it behoveth thee, O regenerate one, to approach me on a bed like to that which I had in the palace of my father.
All this, O slayer of Madhu, indicates defeat.
Behold, O Bharata, doubt (of success) hath already arisen in the hearts of thy warriors!
O puissant one, it is meet for our race that I should retire into the woods.
At that time, O bull of Bharatas race, the king of the Gandharas had full 10,000 horse-men capable of fighting with bright lances.
And Devayani then said, This O father, is the son of Nahusha.
It behoveth thee, O mighty-armed one, to show compassion to this Uttara or to me, thinking that I am thy sister or even a mother that hath lost her son, and one that hath thrown herself upon thy protection.
Vaisampayana said,--The royal messenger, agreeably to the commands of the intelligent king Dhritarashtra, coming upon Yudhishthira, the son of Pritha who had by that time gone a great way, addressed the monarch and said,--Even these are the words of thy father-like uncle, O Bharata, spoken unto thee, The assembly is ready.
These thy lamentations in connection with the Pandavas, as if thou wert a helpless person, are, O king, all useless.
Kunti said, In this connection, O chastiser of foes, is cited an old story of the conversation between Vidula and her son.
29 Sanjaya said, After this, the followers of Subalas son, O monarch, became filled with rage.
Addressing Arjuna, he said, ‘O Arjuna, O son of Pandu, the time is come for the use of that celestial weapon which is in thy memory, knowledge of which was imparted to thee by Drona.
Sanjaya continued, Then Dhananjaya, O king, bowed unto Yudhishthira by bending his head, and seized with his two hands, O sire, the feet of his eldest brother.
For, O king, they that are powerful generally act with unreasoning severity.
Supported by the Pancalas, O sinless one, I will meanwhile destroy the car force of the enemy!
And, O Brahmana, how and for whom and for what reason was the friendship between Drona and Drupada broken off?
Nandini answered, Castest thou me away, O illustrious one, that thou sayest so?
Repairing to the bank of the Sarasvati, the king falling at his feet and touching them with his head, joined his hands and said, O thou of Bharatas race, these words, I gratify thee, O adorable one, forgive my offence.
O king, there is no one in Heaven that is equal to thee.
Without slaying Partha in battle I will not come back, O Bharata.
Dhritarashtra said, Tell me, O thou of great wisdom, what high-souled Vasudeva and Dhananjaya said.
I desire to hear, O Sanjaya, with accurate details, about the situation and dimensions of those countries and cities from which they have come.
Bathed in blood, the Bhoja king looked beautiful like a mountain, O king, streaked with streams of liquefied red chalk after a shower.
Bhima replied, O king of kings, I am thy cook and servant in the first place.
Hearing these words, Amva said, O holy one, abducted I was by Bhishma acting from ignorance, for, O regenerate one, Bhishma knew not that my heart had been given away to Salwa.
There, O king, highly blessed Rishis of excellent vows always waited upon Garga, O lord, for obtaining a knowledge of Time.
Loud sounds came from every side, without, O king, visible creatures to utter them.
And, O Bhima, having felt a human being by coming in contact with thee, I have been put in mind of that son of Raghu, who was Vishnu himself under the name of Rama, and who delighted the heart of the world; and who was as the sun in regard to the lotus face of Sita, and also to that darkness--Ravana.
In battle, O great king, nothing but wholesale destruction is visible.
O brave subjugator of hostile towns, go thyself to that spot where Dhananjaya the son of Pritha is.
And, O foremost of kings, O son of the monarch!
Beholding the king thus afflicted, O bull of Bharatas race, his uterine brothers, accompanied by a large force, encompassed the son of Prishata.
Vaishampayana said, The subject of the features and origin of all these tirthas, O king, is very large.
Endued, O king with celestial vision, Sanjaya will narrate the battle to thee.
For a short space of time, O Bharata, the battle that once more took place became exceedingly fierce, enhancing as it did the fears of timid and the joy of the brave.
Having indulged in those reflections, Devala, in consequence of that resolve obtained the highest success, O Bharata, and the highest Yoga.
And O thou of beautiful face, whence hast thou come to the city of Virata?
O charming one, at the very first glance hast thou stolen my heart!
Yudhishthira said, O good and adorable Brahmana, I wish to know the different names of that high-souled being, by which he is celebrated throughout the three worlds.
O Pushkara, thou art my brother, live thou for a hundred years!
And beholding Bhimasena declare for peace, that intelligent lady, overwhelmed with woe and with eyes bathed in tears, said, O slayer of Madhu, it is known to thee, O thou of mighty arms, by what deceitful of Dhritarashtra, if they do not listen to my words, will surely lie down on the earth turned as morsels of dogs and jackals.
O king, O sinless one, it is not proper that this humiliation should be hers!
Their son, then, of tender years, beholding them and their daughter thus weeping together, lisped these words in a sweet tone, his eyes having dilated with delight, Weep not, O father, nor thou, O mother, nor thou O sister!
Behold, O monarch, Indra coming with his horses, and worshipped by the other gods hastening to this sacrifice.
The fame, however, of such a feat will attach to Bhishma, O tiger among kings, for this Bhishma, O monarch, hath been made by thee the commander of thy forces, and the renown always attacheth to the leader and not to those that fight under him.
Beholding that great enemy of his father, Sutasoma covered Shakuni, O Bharata, with many thousands of arrows.
O bull of Bharatas race, when the prince questioned the minister, the latter told him about the boon that was demanded by the chief of the fishermen in respect of his daughter Gandhavati.
Alas, O Sanjaya, great was the grief that was felt by my son now!
And that concourse of princes, Brahmanas, and others, looking gay at the performances Dhrishtadyumna said, Duryodhana, Durvisaha, Durmukha and Dushpradharshana, Vivinsati, Vikarna, Saha, and Duhsasana; Yuyutsu and Vayuvega and Bhimavegarava; Ugrayudha, Valaki, Kanakayu, and Virochana, Sukundala, Chitrasena, Suvarcha, and Kanakadhwaja; Nandaka, and Vahusali, and Tuhunda, and Vikata; these, O sister, and many other mighty sons of Dhritarashtra--all heroes--accompanied by Karna, have come for thy hand.
And there, O king, the adorable god sports with the wild and playful followers of Kuvera, possessed of weird and ghostly appearances.
Upon the slaughter of his son, Karna, with heart filled with rage, addressed that bull among the Sinis from desire of slaying him, saying, Thou art slain, O grandson of Sini!
And the mighty Asura Vatapi, that foe of Brahmanas, endued with great strength and power of illusion, hearing, O king, those sounds uttered with a loud voice by Ilwala, and ripping open the flanks of the Brahmana would come laughingly out, O lord of earth!
O king, hearing these words of Sudeva, Sunanda washed the dust that covered the mole between Damayantis eye-brows.
My man further reported, O king, these words of Dhananjaya.
O monarch, mounted alone upon a victorious car adorned with gold, that king by the prowess of his weapons brought the whole earth with her seven islands under his sway.
Then I shall ascend to heaven with thee; O prince of Kurus race, receive me in thy embrace for begetting children.
O giver of honours, think now of what is remaining.
Similarly many warriors of ours that were there, said unto Karna, Proceed, proceed, O Karna, and slay Arjuna with keen shafts.
Therefore, O grandson!
And in consequence of those warriors thus flying away and mixing with thy troops, thy broken ranks, O king, were agitated like the vast deep with a tempest.
For the preservation of this city, O thou of large eyes, thou hast taken counsel with thy ministers.
Marutta said, This appalling crash of the thunderbolt together with the howling of the winds, seem terrible to my ears and my heart is afflicted again and again, O Brahmana, and my peace of mind is gone at present.
And that handsome man then went with his army to Duryodhana, O repressor of foes.
And the Brahmanas, O king, searched for him in cities and kingdoms and villages, and retreats of ascetics, and places inhabited by cow-herds.
O Dushmanta, if thou grant this, then let our union take place.
They are competent, O son of Pandu, to slay in battle the army of even the celestials.
Having his limbs for their refuge, this entire universe of mobile and immobile creatures that were present there, O king, looked beautiful, presenting a highly wonderful appearance.
The Rishis said, In days of yore, O Rama, Kuru was engaged in perseveringly tilling the soil of this field.
Never had I, O king, praised myself before, for to praise ones own self is mean.
Surely, O son of the wind-god, there is nothing that is incapable of being achieved by thee; and in fight, Ravana together with his followers was no match for thee single-handed.
O thou of slender waist, Kritavarma’s period of life and fame have come to their end.’ Having said these words, Satyaki rushed at Kritavarma and severed his head with a sword in the very sight of Keshava.
Thou shall, therefore, O god of justice, have to be born among men even in the Sudra order.
91 Sanjaya said, Then Vasudeva, stationed on the car, addressed Karna, saying, By good luck it is, O son of Radha, that thou rememberest virtue!
O lord, think of the means by which, without a war, thou mayst be able to pacify thy brother!
By every means, therefore, O king, do thou seek the growth of thy race.
And beholding Bhimasena unrivalled on earth for beauty and like unto Hidimva replied saying, O tiger among men, O thou of the beauty of a celestial, I do not certainly hold thee in contempt.
Having struck Duryodhana down, the valiant Bhimasena, approaching the Kuru chief, addressed him, saying, O wretch, formerly laughing at the disrobed Draupadi in the midst of the assembly, thou hadst, O fool, addressed us as Cow, Cow!
Abandoned, O chastiser of foes, by my own father, and my father-in law, and afflicted with insufferable woes, what use, O Madhava, is there in my being alive?
And so Dhrishtadyumna also, O king, and the mighty car-warrior Abhimanyu, having heard those words of Partha, joyfully rushed at with great vigour, the battle that took place between them for Bhishmas sake was as fierce as that between Vritra and Vasava.
Meanwhile, O chief of the Bharatas, king Duryodhana, that foremost of car-warriors, saw not in that battle a single warrior on his side.
The high-minded Indra honoured the nymphs and then dismissed them reflecting, O Yudhishthira, solely upon other means of destroying his foe.
15 Sanjaya said, Duryodhana, O king, and Dhrishtadyumna, the son of Prishata, fought a fierce battle, using arrows and darts in profusion.
And, O monarch, the mighty Bhima and Jarasandha fought terribly on in those lists, driving the crowd at times by the motions of their hands like Vritra and Vasava of old.
Wearing brilliant rings on my ears and conch-bangles on my wrists and causing a braid to hang down from my head, I shall, O king, appear as one of the third sex, Brihannala by name.
Duryodhana said, I solicit thee with offer of the leadership of my army, O maternal uncle.
O monarch, every one is honoured and made happy in consequence of thy numerous virtues.
The great Rishi Maitreya also, O scorcher of foes, had formerly cursed Duryodhana, saying, Bhima will, with his mace, break thy thighs!
And, O sister, assisted by Rama and Krishna, we are invincible in battle by even the slayer himself of Vritra--what are the sons of Dhritarashtra?
And, O king of mighty arms, beholding Salwa on that beautiful car of his, the combatants of Dwaraka wavered with fear!
There the great ascetic, O king, named Dalvyavaka poured the kingdom of Dhritarashtra, the son of Vichitravirya, as a libation (on the sacrificial fire).
Indeed, when thou, O Duryodhana, wilt behold elephants, huge as hills, prostrated on the ground with their tusks disabled, their temples crushed and bodies dyed with gore,--in fact, when thou wilt see them lying on the field of battle like riven hills, then, afraid of a clash with him, thou wilt remember these my words.
I shall never, O Bharata, bear these words that Bhishma had said in thy presence in relation to this matter, extolling the Pandavas, and censuring thee, O represser of foes!
Thou shouldst have told me, O king, before this battle took place, that thou wouldst not fight with the Pandavas.
And seeing thy grandson, O king, thus afflicting thy host, thy warriors, O monarch, surrounded him on all sides.
Tell me, O grandsire, the means by which we may vanquish thee in battle, by which sovereignty may be ours, and lastly, by which my army may not have to undergo such destruction.
Vaisampayana said--O king, impressed with the great Rajasuya sacrifice of king Yudhishthira, Sakuni, the son of Suvala, having learnt before the intentions of Duryodhana, while accompanying him in the way from the assembly house, and desirous of saying what was agreeable to him, approached Dhritarashtra endued with great wisdom, and finding the monarch deprived of his eye seated (in his throne), told him these words,--Know, O great king, O bull of the Bharata race, that Duryodhana, having lost colour, hath become pale and emaciated and depressed and a prey to anxiety.
And, O thou without a foe, as all unchaste wile in the family of a man of pure descent cannot be brought back to the path of virtue, so I failed to bring Dhritarashtra back.
Sanjaya continued, O king, thy son, with Karna then, O Bharata, answered the prince of the Madras, O best of Bharatas race, saying, So be it.
Meteors like blazing brands equipped with handles dropped from the sky, O king, on every side on the Earth as if from the solar disc.
O king, thou art of mature wisdom; thou hast the opportunity to listen to the words of old, and thy senses also are under thy control.
Thou art, O learned one, our most respected superior.
O bull of the Bharata race, O king, even this is our highest duty.
Making gifts in this way for ten days, the royal son of Amvika, O chief of Bharatas race, became freed from the debts he owed to his sons and grandsons.
Duryodhana answered, Where have those sports of our childhood gone, O bull of Sinis race, and, alas, how has this battle now come upon us?
During the progress of that battle, O monarch, in which no consideration was shown by anybody for anyone, and which, fraught with awful destruction of the four kinds of forces, therefore, resembled the battle between the gods and the Asuras in days of old, some among the combatants, O scorcher of foes, loudly called upon their kinsmen and friends.
O scum of human kind, I shall assuredly fulfil the vow I have made in the midst of the assembly.
I only grieve to think how thou wilt pass thy days alone, O king.
Tell me, O Krishna, truly.
But, O monarch, thou must not interfere with me in anything I do, be it agreeable or disagreeable.
And then, O Lord of the earth, she took with herself a number of women endowed with beauty and youth, and went to the forest without delay.
Otherwise, the son of Radha, O Janardana, will, in my sight, exterminate the mighty car-warriors of the Parthas and the Srinjayas.
Even thus did that battle occur, O lord, for eight and ten days.
Gratified with thy vows, I shall also grant thee this special boon, O auspicious one, a boon that is superior to what was granted to Arundhati.
The fool, O Bharata, always disregardeth those that are elderly in years, and eminent in conduct and knowledge, in intelligence, wealth, and lineage.
The Brahmana said, In this connection is cited the ancient story, O lady, of the discourse between Karttaviryya and the Ocean.
The time hath come, O father, for us to take counsel together, so that the Pandavas may not swallow us all with our children and friends and relatives.
That pleasure, O king, is, as I think, one of the best fruits of our actions.
Many and awful, O monarch, were the encounters that took place in course of that battle.
O Vandin, thou regardest thyself as the foremost of controversialists.
Thou art, O high-souled one, acquainted with all holy regions.
The Maruts also with Indra, the Vasus with Agni, the Adityas, the Having heard these words of Bhishma, the high-souled son of Bharadwaja, having paid due homage unto Dhritarashtra and the assembled kings, spoke unto him these words, Do that, O king, which the best of the Bharatas, Bhishma, hath said.
O thou respected one, then answer my question truly.
O king.
Do thou listen to me, O scion of the Vrishi race, as I recite to thee the answers he made.
When having humiliated and vanquished all the kings of the earth, Bhishma took thee away, I no longer desire thee, O thou of the fairest complexion, for a wife,--thee that was to have been wedded to another!
Shoot and hurl them, O learned one, for of maces and swords and other weapons used with the arms alone, thou hast thousands upon thousands, as also lances and scimitars and darts and spears!
Tell it all unto me, O Sanjaya.
Indeed, he deserves death at my hands, as also, O Bharata, of every one since in your childhood he always persecuted you all, and since that wicked and sinful wretch robbed you of your kingdom and could not bear the sight of Yudhishthiras prosperity.
In this way also, O Bharata, though I am the eldest, yet being defective of a limb, I was excluded from the kingdom by intelligent Pandu, no doubt, after much reflection.
Thus, O king, have I related to thee the story which thou askedest me to repeat.
Then Uluka, O sire, in that battle, cut off, with a broad-headed arrow steeped in oil, the head of his antagonists driver, O best of the Bharatas.
The sound made, O monarch, by heads falling on the field of battle, resembled that made by the falling fruits of palmyra trees.
Yuyutsu then said, After the fall of Shakuni, O sire, with all his kinsmen and friends, king Duryodhana abandoning the steed he rode, fled away, in fear towards the east.
Then Vrikodara, that scorcher of foes, O king, giving them much wealth, represented everything unto king Yudhishthira the just, saying, Duryodhana, O king, hath been discovered by the huntsmen that supply me with meat!
Victory also hath been thine, O king!
But, O king, even though Bhima was angry, the brave Sisupala depending on his own manhood, did not tremble in fear.
Do thou, O son, become strong (by eating the food that has fallen to thy share).
82 Sanjaya said, After the Kurus, O king, had been put to flight by the mighty car-warrior Arjuna of white steeds, the Sutas son Karna began to destroy the sons of the Pancalas with his mighty shafts, like the tempest destroying congregated masses of clouds.
Then, O Brahmana, out of the deep came a tremendous roar like unto the roar of the clouds at the Universal Dissolution.
O carrier of oblations, these words of thine are worthy of no credence.
O king, as soon as Duryodhana was born I told thee,--thou shouldst abandon this one son, for by abandoning him thou wouldst secure the prosperity of thy hundred sons,--and by keeping him, destruction would overtake thy hundred sons, that gain should never be regarded highly which leadeth to loss.
That other shaft of serpentine mouth that shineth (in thy quiver) and is respectfully worshipped by thee with flowery garlands, will, O Karna, when struck by the son of Pandu with his shafts, perish with thee.
Afflicted by the growth of the child in the womb, Sujata, desirous of riches, conciliating her husband who had no wealth told him in private: How shall I manage, O great sage, the tenth month of my pregnancy having come?
Beholding those lordless widows escorted by Pritha’s son alone O Bharata, the robbers felt a great temptation (for plunder).
I wish to go there where my brothers are.’ Narada, smiling, told him, ‘It should not be so, O king of kings.
The ear said, These arrows will not, O Alarka, cross through me.
What dost thou, O Krishna, think best at this juncture?
Duryodhana, O monarch, fought with Dhrishtadyumna, the slayer of Bharadwajas son, that hero endued with abundant energy and prowess.
Therefore is it, O Yajnasena, that I retain half thy kingdom.
Hearing these words of the high-souled Phalguna, the righteous-souled Yudhishthira, the son of Kunti, addressed Vidura and said these words, Instructed by me, O Kshattri, do thou say unto the Kuru king that I shall give him as much wealth from my treasury as he wishes to give away for the obsequies of his song, and of Bhishma and others among his well-wishers and benefactors.
O bull amongst men, let grief be driven from thy heart, for we are Kshatriyas.
Hearing the slaughter of their sons, those bulls among men, infuriated with rage, those heroes, O illustrious lady, will speedily pursue our track.
Then, O king, Drona addressed Duryodhana fin those words.
Therefore it is, O child, that the learned applaud not a constant habit of forgiveness!
Hearing this, Arjuna said, Even now, O Radhas son, thou hadst fled from battle with me, and it is for this that thou livest although thy younger brother hath been slain.
Having listened to all this, O king Drupada, do what thou desirest.
Perhaps, O Bharata, this thy inclination is not conformable to thy true nature, like to what may be Vaisampayana continued,--Hearing these harsh words of the ruler of Chedi, Bhishma, O king, said in the hearing of the king of Chedi,--Truly am I alive at the pleasure of these rulers of earth.
Vaishampayana said, Formerly, in the Krita age, O king, there was a foremost of regenerate persons called Arshtishena.
Saluting Rama I re-ascended it, O Bharata, and desirous of giving battle, stood fearlessly before that son of Jamadagni.
And, O king, if there be no objection to thy telling it to me, do thou, O best of kings, disclose (the cause of thy anxiety) to me, so that, O prince, I may allay the disquietude of thy mind with all my efforts.
What is thy will, O spirited dame.
Tell me this, O Rishi!
And at the very spot it was that the god Rudra, O king of kings, seized the sacrificial beast and exclaimed, This is my share!
Whether peace is to be established by (apparent) sin or by any other means, O Kesava, speak such words as may prove beneficial to us.
Do thou, therefore, O Vrihannala, cease to advance!
The friendship I had with thee, O first of Brahmanas, was for a particular purpose.
In sadness of heart am I wandering among woods, and mountains, and lakes, and rivers, and tanks and forests, in search of that husband of mine--Nala, skilled in battle, high-souled, and well-versed in the use of weapons, O hath king Nala, the lord of the Nishadhas, come to this delightful asylum of your holy selves?
Rama then answered Yudhishthira in these sweet and righteous words that were highly beneficial to heroes, I have heard it said by the Rishis, O best of kings, that Kurukshetra is a highly sacred and sin-cleansing spot, equal to heaven itself, adored by gods and Rishis and high-souled Brahmanas!
Vaisampayana continued, O king, O lord of men, that slayer of hostile heroes, the Sutas son, said these words to Duryodhana, O Kaurava Duryodhana, do thou lay unto thy heart the words that I shall tell thee; and, O represser of foes, after having heard my words, it behoveth thee to act accordingly every way.
Armed with that scimitar he suddenly began to career in circles over the arena, displaying, O monarch, the fourteen different kinds of manoeuvres, endued as he was with skill and might.
Thou art their father, O king, and the Pandavas are thy sons.
Beholding Bhima, that delighter in battle, approaching him in that way, the son of Radha laughingly said unto Shalya these words, The words that thou, O ruler of the Madras, hast today spoken to me regarding Bhima, O lord, are without doubt all true.
By every exertion in thy power, thou canst not have, O king, such allies as they who are such.
Then, O great king, fear entered my heart.
His driver having been slain, Satyakis steeds were seen to run hither and thither, O Bharata, in that battle.
And, O Brahmana, O oppressor of all enemies, having heard this holy history of Astika that increaseth virtue, and which thou hadst asked me about after hearing the story of the Dundubha, let thy ardent curiosity be satisfied.
Their foremost of heroes slain, themselves thrown into confusion and mangled with keen arrows, thy sons, O king, upon the slaughter of the Sutas son, fled away in fear.
Beholding his son slain, Shakuni, O Bharata, with voice choked with tears and drawing deep breaths, recollected the words of Vidura.
This kingdom, with all these women, and all the wealth here, is thine now, O son of Pritha.
Why will those two, O best of Brahmanas, strive for my good?
Draupadi said,--I ask, O king, that Bhimasena and Dhananjaya and the twins also, with their cars and bows, freed from bondage, regain their liberty.
And, O best of men, the standard of Bhimasena, made of gold and bearing the device of a lion, cut off by Bhishma, fell from the car.
As regards thyself, O Vishnu, amongst all those endued with prowess and strength that have been born of Aditis womb, thou art superior in strength.
Sanjaya said, Upon the fall of the youthful prince of the Chedis, of Vrihatkshatra of Purus race, and of Sudarsana, the chief of the Malavas, who was well-accomplished in the science of arms, and upon the defeat of Dhrishtadyumna and Satyaki and Bhima, and feeling great pain and touched Beholding the Pandava army thus burning in that dreadful battle, thy soldiers, O king, filled with joy, uttered leonine shouts.
The collision of brave leaders of car-divisions, O Bharata, became exceedingly awful.
Thus addressed by Janarddana, Yudhishthira replied, Owing to thy grace, O Govinda.
For this reason, O tiger among men, a dreadful destruction of kinsmen is taking place, caused either by Destiny or by thy evil policy, O king.
And, O princess, all the sons of Dhritarashtra and not the sons of Pritha are now thy masters.
Vaisampayana said, Beholding the king, who had become so, of frightful mien, wearing a long beard smeared with the blood of human beings, the Brahmana Utanka, O king, did not become agitated.
Having caused his divisions to take up their stand, thy son, O Bharata, relying on the might of his arms, fought for a long time with his foes, the Pandavas, who, having gained their end, were filled with joy and had been struggling for hours together.
5 Vaishampayana said, Hearing these words, O monarch, Ambikas son Dhritarashtra, with heart agitated by grief, addressed his driver Sanjaya, saying, Though the evil policy, O sire, of my son of little foresight, Vikartanas son hath been slain!
Go not, O king, unto the region of Yama, with thy sons and troops, for who is there that is capable of fighting with the sons of Pritha, together?
Thus, O monarch, one should regard virtue, wealth and pleasure one after another.
Tell me now, O Sanjaya, the names of those amongst the Pandavas that have been slain by the people of my side!
Beholding the king slain, the troops of Citrasena, O sire, rushed impetuously against (his slayer).
I myself, O king, having only two kinds of forces, and becoming reckless of life, joined the five leaders of our army, and fought with the forces of the Pancala prince, posting our men on that spot where Saradwats son was stationed.
Yet why, O Lomasa, do they prosper in this world?
There, O son of Pandu, is seen the beautiful hermitage of Raivya, where perished Bharadwajas son, Yavakari, profound in Vedic lore.
O ye best of gods, what may be for both her good and mine I ask you to do.
Having with due rites given unto the Brahmanas steeds and elephants and vehicles with mules yoked unto them and jewels of great value and much wealth, and much corn, the illustrious and mighty-armed Rama then proceeded, O king, to the tirtha called Yayata.
Self-knowledge and steadiness, patience and devotion to virtue, competence to keep counsels and charity,--these,--O Bharata, never exist in inferior men.
O foremost regenerate persons, do thou tell me this in detail.
Vaisampayana said, After the high-souled Pandavas had all been seated, Satyavatis son Vyasa said,--O Dhritarashtra of mighty arms, hast thou been able to achieve penances?
Yudhishthira said,--O king, this excellent wealth of pearls of great value, procured from the ocean by churning it (of old), so beautiful and decked with pure gold, this, O king, is my stake.
And then all those lovely women became with child, and O lord of men!
Janamejaya said, Why, O Brahmana, did the Sarasvati bend her course there in an easternly direction?
He who rides on the car of his soul, unto which are yoked these steeds with the aid of traces furnished by good conduct, and drives it, casting off all fear of death, proceedeth, O king, to the regions of Brahman.
O thou of unfading glory, what should we do in view of the occasion that hath come?
O monarch, besides, there were born in the race of Bharata numberless Janamejaya said, O Brahmana, I have now heard from thee this great history of my ancestors.
When thou, O Janardana, art the speaker and Vidura the listener, what subject is there that cannot be rendered smooth and plain?
All the rulers of the earth, O best of kings, have been assembled together.
Both Bhima and Arjuna, I regard as my eyes, and thee, O Janardana as my mind.
And large meteors began to fall east-wards, O bull of Bharatas race, and striking against the rising Sun, broke in fragments with loud noise.
After this, O chief of the Bharatas, Brahmanas should be duly entertained with diverse kinds of enjoyable articles and superior things.
Narada said, Dushmantas son, Bharata, O Srinjaya, we hear, fell a prey to death.
Therefore, O warrior, putting on thy armour, do thou set out this day for the purpose of vanquishing Rama and his followers!
And regarding what they had witnessed to be very extraordinary, they said, O learned Brahmana, do thou bring up the ring also without loss of time.
On him, O ruler of the Madras, my hopes of victory are great.
There is one thing, however, O friend, that I desire to say unto thee, and that is, I am not Narada said, That best of monarchs, king Haryyaswa, after reflecting for a long while and breathing a long and hot sigh about the birth of a After some time, intelligent Galava came back and approaching the delighted Haryyaswa, said unto him, Thou hast, O king obtained a son.
If, O Janarddana, I deserve the least grace from thee, do thou then show me once thy sovereign form.
Once more, O king, the fierce twang of bows and the slapping of palms and the whiz of arrows shot with force was heard.
O thou of sweet face, tell me what is thy wish.
With uplifted arms and weapons and making a loud noise, O monarch, thy warriors headed by Duryodhana rushed against the Pandavas.
That best of Rishis, Vasishtha, O king, became angry, O monarch, with Vishvamitra.
After the fall of Bhurishrava, of Shalya, O Janardana, and of the Avanti heroes, the carnage did not still cease!
Resembling the Destroyer himself in impetuosity and Indra himself in prowess, yonder proceedeth Dronas son, O thou of Kurus race, that hero who is the foremost of all wielders of weapons.
To all this Devayani replied, Why shall I, O father, not grieve for him whose grandfather Vaisampayana continued, Sukra then said, By what path, O Brahmana, hast thou entered my stomach, where thou stayest now?
O bull among men, that thy wife liveth even a moment after thy desertion of her, is only because mortals are decreed to die at the appointed time.
Tell me all this in detail, for thou art skilled in narration, O Sanjaya.
Know, O Bharata, that the joy we felt upon the fall of Duryodhana hath not yet abated in the least!
Tell me all these, O Sanjaya, Many thousands, many millions, many tens of millions, many hundreds of millions, heroic men have come together at Kurujangala.
Adorned with many beautiful things and covered with diverse Koshas made of jewels and gems, the Raivataka hill shone, O king, with great splendour.
And, O bull in Bharatas race, they who became the five sons of Draupadi, those bulls amongst the Bharata princes, were the celestials known as the Viswas.
Therefore, for keeping that earnest vow, Partha, acting also at my instance, inflicted you this insult, O lord of Earth.
And in that battle, O king, arrows were shot by him in hundreds and thousands that were powerful and possessed of great impetuosity and that took in that conflict the lives of numberless Kshatriyas.
This son of Pritha would give up his kingdom and his pleasure but would not Satyaki said, O Rama!
Beholding him then thus blazing up (like a swelling fire), king Duryodhana, O Bharata, despatched ten thousand cars against him.
O chief of the Bharata race!
They will not be able, O monarch, to bear thy impetuosity, especially when thou shalt be protected by us!
Upon the death of that great bowman, his brothers, O giver of honour, will either surrender themselves unto thee or once more retire into the forest.
What joy can be greater, O Karna, that will be mine upon beholding the daughter of Drupada dressed in red rags in the woods?
O thou Parasara, who art acquainted with the higher regions, thou foremost of wise men!
And, O Krishna, never disregard that Supreme Being through whose grace mortal man, by piety, acquireth immortality!
Beholding him approach, Kesava, addressing Partha, said, Yonder cometh the grandson of Sini, O Partha, following in thy wake.
That great host, thus slaughtered, filled with cheerlessness and about to fly away, stood almost inactive, O monarch, assailed on all sides with weapons.
And the power of speech, O Bharata, was suspended in every one.
Tell me also, O king, what regions are attainable by what courses of action.
O Maruta, this is indeed, thy task.
Beholding the dart baffled, thy son, O monarch, struck Yudhishthira with nine sharp and keen-pointed arrows.
And O king, it is by good fortune that thou art still alive with thy wife, O thou of mighty arms!
Behold, O son of Gandhari, the dire fruit of that sinful behaviour.
But the man who having renounced the world, has taken to the life of the recluse in the forest, living on wild roots and edibles, if such a man, O son of Pritha, has a craving for the good things of the world, and is addicted to them, he may be said to bear Mrityu (death) in his mouth.
Having met with this rebuff from him, I have no desire to live any longer now, for by his abandoning me thus, I have, O Narada, become contaminated with sin.
O mighty-armed son of Gandhari, make such arrangements that he may be gratified with thee.
Tell us, O crow, how thou shalt fly with us.
Thou shalt today, O Krishna, behold Karna with his standard and banners with Shalya and his car and steeds, with his umbrella and armour and darts and shafts and bow, cut in pieces with my shafts in battle.
Especially, O thou of faultless features, I, who am deprived of the power of procreation, having yet become desirous of beholding offspring, deserve the more to be obeyed by thee.
And, O Phalguna, the fame of thy achievements will last for ever in the world: thou hast gratified Mahadeva himself in conflict.
O, command us as thou likest.
Those amongst Brahmanas and Kshatriyas and Vaisyas and Sudras who betake themselves to penances, O Bharata, and who purify themselves by gifts and other acts of righteousness, proceed to Heaven.
Do thou, O king, enjoin on me, together with servants, forces, and cars.
This resplendent prosperity of the Bharatas amongst all the kings of the earth, thou wilt, during the very life of Dhritarashtra, destroy through thy wickedness, and thou wilt also, through this arrogant disposition of thine, deprive thyself with all thy counsellors, sons, brothers, and kinsmen, of life, if, O thou foremost of Bharatas race, thou transgressest the words of Kesava, thy father, and of wise Vidura,--words that are consistent with truth and fraught with benefit to thyself.
I am desirous of hearing this, O Sanjaya!
People then, O monarch, beholding the prowess of Dronas son, regarded all the Pandavas as already slain by him.
Then, O god among men, thy troops, and those bulls amongst the Kurus, viz., thy sons resembling the children of the celestials, with a host of warriors of immeasurable might at their van, all proceeded against Satyaki, that bull of Sinis race.
Then the latter, seeing the ring thus recovered, said, We bow to thee, O Brahmana!
I regard destiny to be superior, O Sanjaya, to exertion, when Santanus son Bhishma (even) could not escape Pandus son in battle.
O sinless one, the sisters were endowed with wonderful beauty.
O king, hearing this, the saintly king thus spake to the god who meteth out punishments to departed souls, I shall enter here.
Many other kings, O monarch, endued with great prowess, have fought (for the Pandavas) Having achieved the most difficult feats, all of them have gone to Yamas abode.
Vaisampayana said, Thus addressed, O thou of Kurus race, by the old king, the citizens and the inhabitants of the provinces stood sometime like men deprived of consciousness.
Upon the fall of thy son, O monarch, headless beings of frightful forms, possessed of many legs and many arms, and inspiring all creatures with dread, began to dance and cover the earth on all sides.
O best of Kurus, do not tell any one that I abide here.
O sinless one, thou actest not, O king, in the way thou shouldst!
Victory, O son of Pritha, will surely be thine, and thou wilt surely obtain thy desires fulfilled.
thyself, O Karna to be without substance.
Therefore, O Vidura, going unto king Yudhishthira at my command, bring thou soon that invincible son of Kunti.
O best of ascetics, I desire to have thy permission.
I command thee, O Dhananjaya, go and slay Karna.
O tiger of the Yadu race.
Then, O king, no one of immature years died, and none knew a woman before attaining to age.
Come there, O Rama, without delay!
The region around that hill, O king was adorned with many a mansion decked with gems and many an artificial tree of gaudy hue.
O Rishyasringa of the priestly caste!
At that time, Uluka also encountered Bhima and pierced him with ten arrows, Shakuni, meanwhile, O monarch, having pierced Bhima with three arrows, covered Sahadeva with ninety.
To fight righteously is, O scorcher of foes, what I regard to be good policy.
Then, O monarch, all those kings looking at one another, together spoke unto the Rishis saying, O Brahmana, there is a Danava of the name Ilwala who of all persons on earth, is possessed of enormous wealth.
With a couple of other arrows, O Bharata, he cut off the Sataghni sped at him by the king, in the very sight of the sons of Pandu, and uttered a loud leonine roar.
And, O son of Devaki, O Madhava, I desire to devote that wealth according to the ordinance, unto superior Brahmanas and the carrier of sacrificial libations.
Drona answered, O son of Bhrigu, it behoveth thee to give me all thy weapons together with the mysteries of hurling and recalling them.
O thou that art highly blessed, I know thou art devoted to the welfare of the Pandavas.
Thus questioned by the guardians of peace the ascetic, O king, said not a word, good or otherwise, in reply.
Samvarta said, Welcome to thee, O Indra, by thy presence here, O learned one, this sacrifice has been made grand.
And he said, Listen, O sinful one, to the words I utter and which must be repeated to thy father!
In ancient times, O son, there lived a sage named Valadhi, possessed of great energy.
were the words, O monarch, that he said.
and Kundala, and Rajani, and Puramalini; of Purvabhirama, and Vira, and Bhima, and Oghavati; of Palasini, and Papahara, and Mahendra, and Patalavati, of Karishini, and Asikni, and the large river Kusachira: of Makari, and Pravara, and Mena, and Hema, and Dhritavati; of Puravati, and Anushna, and Saivya, and Kapi, O Bharata; of Sadanira, and Adhrishya, and the mighty stream Kusadhara; of Sadakanta, and Siva, and Viravati; of Vatsu, and Suvastu, and Kampana with Hiranwati; of Vara, and the mighty river Panchami, of Rathachitra, and Jyotiratha, and Viswamitra, and Kapinjala; of Upendra, and Vahula, and Kuchira, and Madhuvahini: of Vinadi, and Pinjala, and Vena, and the great river Pungavena; of Vidisa and Krishna-vena, and Tamra, and Kapila, of Salu, and Suvama, the Vedaswa, and the mighty river Harisrava; of Sighra, and Pischala, and the river Bharadwaji, of the river Kausiki, and Sona, and Chandrama; of Durgamantrasila, and Brahma-vodhya, and Vrihadvati; of Yaksha, and Rohi, and Yamvunadi; of Sunasa and Tamasa, and Dasi, and Vasa, and Varuna, and Asi; of Nila, and Dhrimati, and the mighty river Parnasa; of Pomasi, and Vrishabha, and Brahma-meddhya, and Vrihaddhani.
Contracting his brow into three lines, and waving his arms repeatedly, and rolling his large eyes red in wrath, that warrior of massive arms proud of his lineage and wealth and knowledge and strength, said these words: Shalya said, Since, O son of Gandhari, thou describest me, O thou of Kurus race, in the midst of all these troops, to be superior to Devakis son, I am gratified with thee.
Pierced with wordy darts, O Rama, from every side, the mighty and heroic Duryodhana hath risen from the lake armed with his heavy mace.
O, think of all this.
Upon the fall of Suketu, O monarch, his troops became frightened, and avoiding Kripa, fled away on all sides.
Slay, O king, the car-divisions (of the Pandavas)!
Then Salya and Kripa, and Chitrasena, O Bharata, and Dussasana, and Vikarna, those heroes mounted on their bright cars, caused the Pandava host to tremble.
O prince, let this priest (of the Celestials) perform thy sacrifice, and make thee, who art only a mortal, attain immortality.
Remember, O wife, that I endeavoured to migrate to some other place where we would be happy, but thou didst not then listen to me.
Thus, O king, did that tiger among men.
If, O chastiser of foes, thou art united with thy sons and kinsmen and counsellors, thou wilt enjoy sovereignty of the whole earth won for thee by them.
Heaping infamy on my head, O accursed woman of our race, thou hast, O mother, attained this, thy object!
Alone and without anybody by thy side, thou shalt wander through diverse countries, O wretch, thou shalt have no place in the midst of men.
The Siddhas then, once more addressing Devala, said unto him, Thou, O Devala, art not competent to proceed thither, to the abode of Brahman, whither Jaigishavya hath gone!
Receive now, O thou of wicked understanding, the fruit of that act!
Elephants coming against elephants tore one another with their tusks, O king.
I am, O thou lotus-eyed one, thy wedded wife, devoted to thee.
O foremost of victorious persons, I would conquer the very gods with Indra at their head, when, O Govinda, I have thee for my protector.
Then the eldest daughter of the ruler of Kasi, filled with anger, and her eyes bathed in tears, said these words with a voice choked with tears and grief, Cast off, O king, by thee, whithersoever I may go, the righteous will be my protectors, for truth is indestructible!
And since it is here that towards the days end (paschat) the sun dismisseth his rays that this quarter, O best of the twice-born ones, is called the west (paschima).
How can one who is such, deserve praise, O Bhishma?
Of cloth-yard shafts thou hast still 2,000, O hero, and of Pradaras thou hast still, O Partha, 3,000!
The Earth, O lord, was soon covered with human beings that were crushed into shapelessness or trodden down by elephants and steeds and with others that roared in great affliction.
O Sakuni, vanquish us, not like a wretch, by deceitful means.
And many amongst them, declaring the names of their sires and families, O lord, began to crush one another, O king, with darts and lances and battle-axes.
O sinless one, hear in detail the particulars about Arjunas meeting with the three-eyed god of gods, and his contact with the illustrious gods person!
And, O daughter of Drupada, thou shalt certainly behold the earth ruled by Yudhishthira after the sons of Dhritarashtra have been slain and the deeds of their hostility avenged!
Those arms, looking like the tapering bodies of snakes, and smeared with sandal paste, O king, looked beautiful, when drenched with blood, like little standards of gold.
The field, O monarch, indented with the hoofs of those steeds, looked beautiful like a beautiful woman bearing the marks of (her lovers) nails on her person.
Comforted a little, the invincible Sahadeva, O monarch, pierced Shakuni with ten arrows and his steeds with three.
Thus the name of that region, O Brahmanas, hath been explained, and the country described to you as a sacred and delightful one.
O god, I am curious to hear about the occasion of that imprecation.
Without doubt this sad and woeful result had been ordained by the Creator himself, that we should injure thee and thou shouldst injure us, O foremost one of Kurus race!
The elephant, however, coming upon other elephants and cars and steeds, O king, despatched them all to Yamas abode.
And Indra, gratified, told him, O prince of snakes, O Takshaka, here thou hast no fear from that snake-sacrifice.
O slayer of Madhu, who else is there than thee, who regarding himself a man would say in the midst of respectable men that his wife had been intended for some body else?
We desire, O great god, that they be dispossessed of that dignity, and ourselves installed in their place, and that we, instead of them, be worshipped by the world.
And O beauteous one, do thou select him for lord who may please thy fancy.
Yudhishthira said,--This my sacred and victorious and royal car which gladdeneth the heart and hath carried us hither, which is equal unto a thousand cars, which is of symmetrical proportions and covered with tiger-skin, and furnished with excellent wheels and flag-staffs which is handsome, and decked with strings of little bells, whose clatter is even like the roar of the clouds or of the ocean, and which is drawn by eight noble steeds known all over the kingdom and which are white as the moon-beam and from whose hoofs no terrestrial creature can escape--this, O king, is my wealth with which I will stake with thee!
O lord of the Salwas, I swear, O tiger among men, by touching my own head that I have never thought of any other husband than thee!
O king, O best of Bharatas race, how lucky it is that thou hast come out of this difficulty of thine.
Samvarta said, Thou must never come again thus to present Vrihaspati to Marutta: for know, O Pavaka, (Agni) if thou dost, I losing my temper, will burn thee with my fierce evil eyes.
Dhritarashtra said, When my troops were slain and our camp made entirely empty, what was the strength, O Suta, of the troops that still remained to the Pandavas?
And since thou, O Rama, in a matter connected with profit of doubtful propriety, actest unrighteously, I would certainly fight with thee in a great battle.
Seek him, O wise one, and bring him hither; else, O Sanjaya, I will lay down my life!
And it was thus, O king, that people began to speak, from province to province of the invincible Kichaka, that slayer of hostile ranks.
Having thus deliberated, O elder brother of Pandu, the heroic sons of Pandu, and the valiant Vasudeva, all proceeded together towards the abode of Bhishma, casting aside their coats of mail and weapons and entering then his tent, they all bowed to him, bending their heads.
This, therefore, is my opinion, O monarch, that thou shouldst, without delay, permit the Pandavas to go thither with their wife.
Janamejaya said, Tell me, O foremost of men, the features, the origin, and the merits of the several tirthas on the Sarasvati and the ordinances to be observed while sojourning there!
And some, weltering in pools of blood and excessively weakened, O Bharata, greatly censured themselves and thy sons assembled together for battle.
And, O tiger among men, also this princess of high fortune, ever devoted to her lords, desireth not to return without thee.
And cars, O king, were seen to mingle with cars.
O firmament-ranger, Samvarana will make a worthy husband for thy daughter.
I greatly fear, O Brahmana, lest my speech should become untrue.
O learned man, Duryodhana would not yield even a single foot of land if thou appealest to his fears, but if justice requires, he would give up the whole earth even to a foe.
O thou of mighty arms, imitate thy own ancestors.
And, O thou of Bharatas race, the beautiful Gandhari gratified all the Kurus by her behaviour and respectful attentions.
Agni said, Let this king of the Gandharvas repair thither as thy messenger, O Vasava, for, I am afraid to go thither myself.
Tell me calmly and quietly, O learned Rishi, for I wish to hear it in detail.
Loud also became the noise, making the very hair to stand on end, of bodies falling down on the ground, divested of armour and mangled with weapons and of falling weapons also, O king, and of arms and thighs severed from the trunk.
When thou, O Bharata, art here, this does not look well!
Sanjaya said, Hear, O king, with attention how that awful and great carnage of human beings and elephants and steeds occurred in battle.
The damsel, O king, having cleansed herself, began her task; restraining speech and with attention fixed on it, she sat to her task without feeling any fatigue.
If, O Bharata, thou dost not accept the truthful words of thy friends, Krishna and Bhishma, then, O sire, thou wilt surely have to repent.
Alas, moved by wrath and convetousness, we are here to-day for fighting against each other, O thou of the Satwata race!
O husband, dost thou desert me?
That best of kings, O monarch, is in my judgment, a Ratha.
Success has been attained by thee, O mighty-armed one, and eternal regions (of felicity) have become thine.
49 50 Sanjaya said, Beholding the Pandava heroes rushing impetuously towards thy host, Duryodhana, O monarch, endeavoured to check the warriors of his army on all sides, O bull of Bharata race.
He had one hundred wives, O king, all suitably matched to their husband.
While he was employed in achieving those superhuman feats in battle, large throngs of Pancala cars, O king, quickly surrounded him on all sides.
The five Pancalas, O Bharata, that he slew in that battle were Bhanudeva and Citrasena and Senavindu and Tapana and Surasena.
Then, O monarch, the old men that had been appointed to look after the ladies of the royal household proceeded towards the city, taking the princesses after them.
Thy life, O thou of limited foresight, now depends upon me!
A battle such as that, O king, which (then) took place between thy sons, O Bharata, and the Pandavas, was never seen or heard before.
Vaisampayana continued, After this, O Bharata, Drona released the king of Panchala, and cheerfully performing the usual offices of regard, bestowed upon him half the kingdom.
After I had come about two miles, O monarch, I beheld Duryodhana, standing alone, mace in hand, and exceedingly mangled.
These, O Madhava, form the remnant of Duryodhanas force!
Acceptance of a gift, O king, is not the duty laid down for a Kshatriya!
Duryodhana, O monarch, unable to endure the whiz of the shafts shot by those high-souled heroes, became stupefied!
If thou hast still anything that thou hast not yet lost to us, O son of Kunti, tell us what it is!
Even as darkness is destroyed, O sire, at the sight of Surya and Aruna, even so let the Kaunteyas (Pandavas) with the Pancalas and the Srinjayas perish beholding thee and Karna.
And Devayani, seeing the kine returned from the woods without Kacha, spoke, O Bharata, unto her father thus: Thy evening-fire hath been kindled.
O thou that art endued with great wisdom, gambling robs even the good of their understanding, and as regards the wicked, disunion and dire consequence spring from it.
Upon the slaughter of that lion among car-warriors, O monarch, hath thy force fallen into this plight.
If thou wishest to do what is agreeable to me, unite with them, O thou of mighty arms!
I desire, O chastiser of foes, that thou mayst speedily give me these; for, this one gain of mine will be considered as superior to every other gain!
The four regions have thus, O sire, been, one after another described to thee in details.
O holy one, it behoveth thee to make true those words that thou, O lord, hadst then said to us.
Satayupa, O scorcher of foes, had been the great king of the Kekayas.
Narada said, Desirous of seeing Maheswara, O prince, he wanders about at his pleasure in the city of Varanasi, in the garb of a mad man.
Duryodhana said,--This Sukuni skilled at dice, is ready, O king, to snatch the prosperity of the son of Pandu by means of dice.
Do not, O Bharata, grieve for this.
64 Dhritarashtra said, Kicked at the head, his thighs broken, prostrated on the ground, exceedingly proud, what, O Sanjaya, did my son then say?
Those blessed ones of high vows, arrived there, invoked that foremost of rivers and said these words unto her, Tell us the reason, O auspicious lady, why this lake in thee hath been afflicted with such distress Hearing it, we shall endeavour (to restore it to its proper condition).
Thither where Pandus son of virtuous soul cast his eyes with the desire of producing evil, thither thy army broke, O bull of Bharatas race.
It is evident, O Janardana, that Duryodhana took his birth for exterminating his race!
O thou best of regenerate ones, I desire to hear all this under thy favour.
My son, O sinless one, had been the lord of eleven chamus of troops He had all the kings under his command and had enjoyed the sovereignty of the whole earth!
Then Shakuni, with a number of broad-headed shafts of great impetuosity, keen and perfectly straight, cut off, O king, the bow of Sutasoma as also all his quivers.
On the other hand, O bull of the Bharata race, fight with him With thy arms, putting forth as much strength only as thy antagonist hath now left!
Keeping these before thee and treating them with kindness as in days of yore, thou, O monarch, wilt enjoy the sovereignty of the whole earth.
Upon the death of the sons of Pandu, the whole of the earth, O Karna, with her mountains and waters and forests, we will enjoy without a thorn on our side!
Then Prativindhya, O king, filled with rage, and desiring to compass the destruction of Citra, sped at him a lance decked with gold.
Duryodhana replied, What thou sayest, O father, is perfectly true.
Tranquilise thyself, O monarch I Consider the Pandavas to be already vanquished!
the ruler of the Nishadhas, saying, O foremost of monarchs ruling the Nishadhas, O Nala, thou art devoted to truth.
And how, O Brahmana!
Then Arjuna said, What need, O Bhima, for keeping the Rakshasa alive so long?
And understanding the intentions of both Sanjaya and his son, Krishna-Dwaipayana endued with great wisdom said, Say, O Sanjaya, unto the enquiring Dhritarashtra everything that he desireth to know.
Tell us, O Vidura, who they are and with whom we shall have to play, staking hundreds upon hundreds of our possessions.
And, O best of kings, all that had been commanded to be done, was gradually executed.
When I heard that the virtuous Pandavas weeping with affliction had followed their elder brother to the wilderness and exerted themselves variously for the mitigation of his discomforts, then, O Sanjaya, I had no hope of success.
Thus addressed, Vijaya, replied, O bull of Bharatas race, saying, I swear by Truth, O king, and by thy grace, by Bhima, O best of men, and by the twins, O lord of the earth, that today I shall slay Karna, in battle, or, being myself slain by him fall down on the earth.
Recollecting, O king, that Shakuni, who had fallen to his share, was still alive, Sahadeva, on his car adorned with gold, pursued that warrior.
Learn the instrumental music that is current among the celestials and which existeth not in the world of men, for, O son of Kunti, it will be to thy benefit.
She was not bestowed on thee O Rakshasa, this lady was duly made by the Rishi Bhrigu his wife with Vedic rites in my presence.
Eyeing these (virtue and profit) only, I urge thee, O Sanjaya, to battle.
These, O father, are my views for the discomfiture of the Pandavas.
In this very tirtha, O auspicious, sinless, and highly blessed one, the seven Rishis had, on one occasion, left Arundhati, (the wife of one of them), when they went to Himavat.
O illustrious dame, unite me with this thy son, my husband.
O foremost of men, the day is about to expire, strike now the foe with clouds of shafts!
That distress, O king, hath now overtaken us.
All of them, then, O king, went to the place whence they had come, and Trita, filled with joy, proceeded to his own abode.
O thou of tapering thighs, of all forms of marriage, the Gandharva one is regarded as the first.
Oh, why didst thou not spare, O child, even one son of this old couple deprived of kingdom, one whose offences were lighter?
What is thy counter stake, O great king,--the wealth with which thou wishest to play with me?
The fathers then answered, Try thy best, O child, to beget a son to extend our line.
Sanjaya said, I will not say anything to thee in secret, O king, for then thou mayst entertain ill-feelings towards me.
It was also surrounded by many well-skilled and clever physicians, O thou of great intelligence.
Hearing these words of his, all these residents of Kurujangala, uttered loud lamentations, O best of the Bharatas, with voices choked with tears.
I do not see here, O son of Kunti, the person whom thou mayst slay.
If, O Bharata, tomorrows sun sheds his rays upon him who is the source of many griefs of mine, I shall, surely, mixing poison (with some drink), drink it up,--for I never shall yield to Kichaka.
Indeed, Bhimasena, the son of Kunti, having slain thy sons in battle, regarded his object achieved, O lord, and the purpose of his birth accomplished.
I will now tell thee, O son of Pandu, this mystery connected with morality, this mystery that was declared by Bhishma, by the righteous Yudhishthira, by Vidura otherwise called Kshatri, and by Kunti, of great celebrity.
All of them blew their conchs and Jadava himself blew Panchajanya, filled with joy, O bull among men, at the sight of Duryodhana struck down in battle.
Pleased with Soma, the adorable Daksha once more addressed him, saying, Do not, O son, disregard women, and never disregard Brahmanas!
Sukra replied, Thou art, O Devayani, no daughter of a hired adorer, of one that asketh for alms and accepteth gifts.
Then Bhima, O monarch, once more mounting on his own car, began to shoot keen shafts at the vital limbs of thy sons.
Therefore, O bull amongst men, strive for the acquisition of wealth by exerting thy might and energy.
Uttara said, Thou hast, O king, committed an improper act.
Because I cannot give up forgiveness, go thou, O Nandini, if thou choosest.
But, O Sanjaya, what measures should I now adopt?
Hearing, however, these words of thine about what had been ordained by the gods, I shall not think of casting off my life-breath and shall live and act without indulging in grief!’ Hearing these words of Dhritarashtra, O monarch, Satyavati’s son, Vyasa, disappeared then and there.
The adorable Mahadeva, highly pleased with Arundhati, said unto her, Approach, as formerly, these Rishis, O righteous one!
And beholding, O bull of Bharatas race, that standard failing in consequence of the shafts of Subhadras son, the proud Bhima set up a loud shout for cheering the son of Subhadra.
Those mighty car-warriors of the Pandavas, O king, in that battle, though struggling vigorously, were repeatedly broken by the son of Radha, even as a herd of deer in the forest is routed by an angry lion.
Recollecting the words that the son of Pandu had said, those hunters, O king, whisperingly said unto one another, We will discover Duryodhana (unto the Pandavas).
There, at Kurukshetra, O foremost of Kurus care, do thou perform grand sacrifices and rites!
And then when (those) thousand of car-warriors fled away in all directions, Subhadras son and that bull of Sinis race, both stationed on the same car, began, O chastiser of foes, to slaughter the army of Suvalas son of battle.
By acting thus, O king, fame will be thine in this world.
And, O Bharata, Bhishma and Drona and Kripa and the high-souled Vidura with cheerless hearts sat behind.
Endued with great energy, Dhritarashtra then said to Yudhishthira,--I wish, O son, to take some food, with thy permission.
Vaisampayana said,--Arjuna who had obtained that excellent of bows and that couple of inexhaustible quivers, and that car with that banner, as also that assembly room, now addressed Yudhishthira and said,--I have obtained, O king, a bow and weapons and arrows and energy and allies and dominions and fame and strength.
Tell me that, O thou endued with great wisdom.
Thereupon, as if burning all the cardinal points by his wrath, he said unto me, Since, O lord of treasures, in thy very presence, disregarding me, this thy friend hath thus affronted me, he, together with thy forces, shall meet with destruction at the hands of a mortal.
And elephants, O king, destitute of riders, and slain horsemen (of the Pandava army), lay dead.
If thou slayest him today, O mighty-armed one, the victory will be thine, O Phalguna!
O king, we have heard that carrying on severe austerities he again greatly agitated Indra.
Those waters, O Matali, that yielded these precious things had all been mixed with the milk of these tour cows.
O mighty-armed one, with the object of beholding that war-like tiger among men, shall we repair to the Gandhamadana mountain, where lies the hermitage of Nara and Narayana at the site of the celebrated jujube tree, and which is inhabited by the Yakshas.
And, O Krishna, though (really) weak, why do the Pandavas yet so cheerfully seek a quarrel with us, as if they were strong?
How, indeed, O Sanjaya, was Shalya slain by king Yudhishthira the just?
Infuriate elephants, O king, routing large numbers of steeds, slew them with their tusks or crushed them with great force.
Within the twinkling of an eye he then deprived the (five) sons of Draupadi of their cars, O bull of Bharatas race, which seemed exceedingly wonderful.
And, O Bhima, there are heard various songs of appropriate measures, and also Vedic hymns, charming to all creatures.
We then, O monarch, beheld a net of arrows spread before the chest of Pandus son like a mass of risen clouds.
O invincible one, thou hast Narayana (again) for aiding thee.
The arrowy showers shot by both became exceedingly terrible and were as dense, O bull of Bharatas race, as the torrents of rain poured by two masses of clouds at the close of summer.
A large number of beautiful and auspicious birds, O king, called Pung, causing Arjuna (by their timely appearance) to put forth greater speed in battle, cheerfully uttered their cries around him.
I am desirous, O Madhava, of beholding this encounter with the mace between these two disciples of mine!
O thou of taper thighs, the practice is yet regarded with respect amongst the Northern Kurus.
And he said, O sire, as Pratipas son, Santanu, was devoted to the welfare of his race, and as Devavrata, otherwise called Bhishma was devoted to the welfare of his race, so was the royal Pandu, that king of Vasudeva continued, After Drona, of immeasurable energy, had said this, the virtuous Vidura then, O king, who is devoted to truth, said these words, turning towards his uncle (Bhishma) and looking at his face.
Slay the Danavas, O wielder of the trident.
Meanwhile the Dhartarashtras, O monarch, who had not fled far from that spot, beholding the king, rallied and returned there, clad in mail.
The holy one said,--Cleansing thyself, O mighty-armed one, utter on the eve of the battle thy hymn to Durga for (compassing) the defeat of the foe.
Understanding the views of those great Rishis, that foremost of rivers caused her body, O bull among men, to assume a new shape called Aruna.
Hearing these words of Shakuni, O bull of Bharatas race, they answered saying, Yonder stayeth that great car-warrior, the Kuru king, there where that large umbrella of splendour equal to that of the full moon, is visible--there where those car-warriors, clad in mail, are staying--there where that loud noise, deep as the roar of clouds, is being heard!
Tell me all this, O Sanjaya, for thou art skilled in narration!
Indeed in that auspicious and sacred tirtha of the Sarasvati, Vishnu himself, having in days of yore slain the Asuras, Madhu and Kaitabha, had, O chief of the Bharatas, performed his ablutions.
O Devayani, Kacha is even within me.
This is very true, O king, and bound I have been with wealth by the Kauravas.
Therefore, O Madhava, as promised before by thee, render me aid without fighting for me.
Therefore, O Savitri, proceed without delay.
Comforted after a long while, that lord of earth, afflicted with sorrow on account of the death of his sons, remained silent, sighing heavily, O monarch, like a snake put into a jar.
The gods with Brahman at their head worship thy boon giving self, O sinless one!
Their victory is not at all a matter of wonder that have thee, O Kesava, for their lord.
As contact with the properties of the ocean make the sweet waters of the celestial stream Ganga brakish, so the valour, O king, of the illustrious warriors of thy army coming in contact with the heroic sons of Pandu in battle, becometh futile.
And Duryodhana struck that son of Pandu with twenty sharp Dhritarashtra said, How, O Sanjaya, did Santanus son Bhishma of mighty energy fight on the tenth day of battle, with the Pandavas and the Srinjayas?
Hear my words, O Karna!
And he pierced Drona, O king, with seven sharp-pointed arrows, and speedily caused Prishatas son to be taken up on another car.
I shall, however, fly in that one kind of motion that all (other) birds know, for I do not, O crow, know any other.
In consequence of thy evil counsels, O king, dreadful was the battle that then ensued in which maces and lances were used and in which heroes only took part.
Then the Pandavas, O elder brother of Pandu (Dhritarashtra), with cars and elephants and steeds, approached the ruler of the Madras and began to afflict him from every side.
They answered, O monarch, telling him that he had gone to the Yamuna for his ablutions, as also for fetching flowers and waters.
Sesha said, O divine Lord of all creatures, O bestower of boons, O lord of the Earth, lord of every created thing, lord of the universe, I will, even as thou sayest hold the Earth steady.
Who, O Sanjaya, stood in the wings and the further wings of our army?
O Puru, take thou this my weakness and decrepitude!
Vaisampayana said, O chief of the Bharata race!
By these, O king, was thy daughter won amid the concourse of monarchs.
And, O king, Fate is all powerful.
Although I have been deceived by thee as to the duties I owe towards a son, yet, O beautiful lady, from kindness I will act towards you both in a suitable manner.
O illustrious one, leaving that peerless palace built by Maya, which possesseth the splendour of the palace of the celestials themselves, and is like unto a celestial illusion, ever guarded by the gods, where dost thou go, O son of Dharma?
Indeed, coming out of Dhrishtadyumnas abode, O king, Ashvatthama caused all the points of the compass to resound with his roars, and then proceeded on his car to other parts of the camp for slaying his foes.
If, therefore, O king, the Pandavas, who live in the territories, have liberated thee, what is there to be regretted at in this?
By good luck, O thou of mighty arms, thy heart inclineth to battle!
It is quite out of place, therefore, O illustrious king, to give him anything now, for war having been decided upon, it should never be put off by hospitality.
The son of Pandu, O king, covered all of them with his arrows.
Vaisampayana said, O scion of Bharatas race!
O monarch!
Why then, O foremost of monarchs, dost thou lie alone on the bare ground in such a lonely wilderness?
The valiant son of Madri fearlessly pierced each of them, O monarch, with couple of shafts at the van of battle.
And the son of Dhritarashtra beholding those kings and sons and grand sons of kings all remaining silent, smiled a little, and addressing the daughter of the king of Panchala, said,--O Yajnaseni, the question thou hast put dependeth on thy husbands--on Bhima of mighty strength, on Arjuna, on Nakula, on Sahadeva.
O thou of excellent qualities, they did not then adhere to their husbands faithfully, and yet, O handsome one, they were not regarded sinful, for that was the sanctioned usage of the times.
O lord of all, let it be understood now that when I become thy daughter-in-law, thy son shall not be able to judge of the propriety of my acts.
The Brahmanas said, Let no anxiety, O king, in respect of our maintenance, find a place in thy heart!
O sinless one, as Kunti, or Madri, or Sachi, is to me, so art thou, the parent of my race, an object of reverence to me.
As I have been repulsed by Vrihaspati for no fault of mine, I have now no desire, O Brahmana, to go to him to seek his aid in this sacrifice.
This, however, O king, I beg of thee by bending my head.
Do that, O Brahmana, which is proper to be done towards either that tiger among the Kurus, viz., Bhishma, singly, or towards the ruler of the Salwas, or towards both of them!
If, therefore, O king, this kingdom be established in thee by destiny, it will certainly continue in thee, even if the whole world were to become thy enemy!
My desire is to dwell in company with this very man, either in the abode of the gods, or in hell, for, O Dharmaraja!
Alas, O lord, great is the grief, like poison or fire, that one suffers at the loss of sons, of wealth, of kinsmen, and relatives.
Dhananjaya had not cast off his celestial bow Gandiva, nor his couple of inexhaustible quivers, actuated, O king, by the cupidity that attaches one to things of great value.
O grinder of foes, allies such as these, always play the part of faithful counsellors to a person who seeketh his own welfare and desireth to acquire what is agreeable to himself.
O Dhananjaya, he hath deceived and wronged both king Yudhishthira the just and Krishna.
It behoveth thee, O Brahmana, to tell me everything about his return!
Bhimasena said, O slayer of Madhu, do not, O delighter of the Yadus, give way to sorrow!
That foe of thine, O bull of Kurus race, lieth today on the bare ground, pierced all over with arrows.
Therefore, O son, leave us.
And, O king, he continued to live there unrecognised by the other servants of Virata as also by other people!
O Agni, it is thou who art the bearer of sacred offerings.
He pledged in the midst of the assembly, O Bharata, that he would live for twelve years in the forest.
Unto him speaking thus, Bhishma said, What sayest thou, O Karna?
Thus, O monarch, the embers of that battle began to glow here and there, in consequence, O king, of the evil policy of thyself and thy son, O Bharata.
Similarly, thy warriors, O king, desirous of great renown, and nobly resolved upon battle, stood on the field, determined to fight.
Then, O great king, the Trigartas and the Madras, with the Kekayas, numbering five and twenty thousand urged by thy son, all of whom were foremost of men accomplished in the science of arms and who were incapable of defeat by foes in battle, surrounded Kiritin with his son for slaying them both.
And, O king, having entrusted to the care of the lord of the Pulindas, all their servants--Indrasena and the others,--and the cooks and the stewards, and Draupadis accoutrements, and every thing else, those mighty charioteers, the son of the Kurus, endued with great prowess, set out from that country, and began to proceed cautiously with Krishna,--all of them cheerful in the expectation of beholding Arjuna.
Tell me, O Sanjaya, all that Partha achieved there on that occasion.
Indeed, exceedingly wonderful was the sight that we then beheld, even like the flying of rocks, for Shikhandi, O king, (thus assailed) remained perfectly inactive in that battle.
Therefore, O son, stand here with bow and arrow for an instant.
How can, O son of Pritha, any weak monarch approach him with hostile intentions?
The latters bow having been cut off, Srutakarman then, O king, pierced him with three hundred arrows equipped with goodly wings, covering him completely therewith.
O exalted one, from this forcible seizure of Duryodhana and from this insult to the ladies of our house by a stranger, our family honour is being destroyed.
O king, staring at the Rakshasa bereft of sense, Sahadeva addressed Yudhishthira, the son of Kunti, saying, What can be more meritorious for a Kshatriya than to fall in fight, or defeat a foe?
O cow!
O best of speakers!
Therefore, O lord, do thou desist.
Mahodara then, O king, freed from the Rakshasas head, cheerfully returned, with cleansed soul and all his sins washed away, to his asylum after achieving success.
When such has been the case, O chastiser of foes, what can I now do?
The grandson of Sini then, Satyaki, O bull of Bharatas race, shooting his shafts, proceeded against the frightened Kauravas while the latter were flying away.
If peace had been made after Bhishmas fall, O Madhava, everything would have been well!
The great Rama, having duly bathed there, made presents unto the Brahmanas, O Janamejaya, and worshipped them thus.
Some amongst them were dark and looked like clouds in hue and some were of the colour of smoke, O bull of Bharatas race.
I go with speed, O amiable one, to cure, without loss of time, the king of immeasurable prowess, the sole representative of the Pandava race, after he is bit by the same Takshaka like to Agni himself in energy.
Let me not, O Virochana, curse thee!
I am saved by thee, O Madhava.
Sanjaya said, Blessed be thou, O king, I have no regard for the illusion (that is identified with worldly pleasures) and I never practise the useless virtues (of vows and work without reliance on Him and purity of Soul).
It is known to thee, O thou of great wisdom, that amongst the Bhojas, they abandoned, for the good of the citizens a son that was unworthy of their race.
O Brahmana, the duties that women of good behaviour discharge with care and the conduct that is pursued by good sons towards their fathers and mothers appear to me to be most difficult of performance.
Those men that cast off their bodies while engaged in battle on this field, are sure to reside, O sire, in heaven with Shakra himself!
Therefore, O Dhananjaya, summon all thy coolness.
Amongst those thousands upon thousands of high-souled kings on thy side, only Duryodhana now, O monarch, exceedingly wounded, was seen to be alive, casting his eyes on all sides, and seeing the earth empty, himself destitute of all his troops while the Pandavas, filled with joy in that battle, were roaring aloud in consequence of the accomplishment of all their objects.
I shall tell thee, O disciple, what the Grandsire, thus addressed, said unto them, conformably to the scriptures.
O lord, let our wish be accomplished.
Then Bhimasena, O king, quickly coming up to Satyaki thus armed with an excellent scimitar, took him up on his own car.
Our prosperity is thy victory, O lord!
Dhritarashtra said, How, O Sanjaya, did the son of Radha dispose his forces in counter array to all the Pandavas headed by Dhristadyumna and protected by Bhimasena, viz., all those great bowmen invincible by the very gods?
Karna said, If, O Krishna, we come out of this great battle that will be so destructive of heroic Kshatriyas, with life, then, O thou of mighty arms may we meet here again.
Vasudeva said, Unto that disciple who had humbly sought his instruction and put the questions duly, who was devoted to his preceptor and possessed of tranquillity, and who always behaved in a manner that was agreeable (to his instructor), who lived so constantly by the side of his instructor as to have almost become his shadow, who was self-restrained, and who had the life of a Yati and Brahmacharin, O son of Pritha, that preceptor possessed of intelligence and observant of vows, duly explained all the questions, O foremost one of Kurus race, O chastiser of all foes.
Indeed, O monarch, those two who had always slept on costly beds now slept, like helpless persons, on the bare ground, afflicted with toil and grief.
Hearing these words of Bhishma, Yudhishthira said--O Grandsire, O thou of the Kuru race, whom thou deemest the foremost amongst these and unto whom the Arghya should be presented by us, O tell me.
That foremost of Sutas, viz., Senavindu, having consumed many foes in battle, hath, at last, O king been slain by Bahlika.
Kotisa, Manasa, Purna, Cala, Pala Halmaka, Pichchala, Kaunapa, Cakra, O Brahmana, thus I have recited the names of the principal snakes known widely for their achievements--I have not been able to name all, the number being countless.
Therefore, be pleased, O Brahmana, to recite the delightful narrative just in detail commencing from Manu, the lord of creation.
Then, O king, we beheld the car of Shalya careering in that dreadful battle like the car of Shakra in days of yore on the occasion of the destruction of the Asuras.
Even so, O thou of mighty arms, hath been the vow made by me in the Presence of all bowmen and in the midst of all the Kshatriyas.
As long as thou art here, O thou of Kuru’s race, torments cease to afflict us.’ These and many similar words, uttered in piteous voices by persons in pain, the king heard in that region, wafted to his ears from every side.
Today, O lord, we have seen it with our eyes.
Gandhari also, O best of kings, and all the Kuru ladies, suddenly fell down on the ground, hearing those cruel words.
We are determined to accompany thee tomorrow, O bull among men!
Even if they succeed in observing this vow for thirteen years, we shall be in the meantime firmly rooted in the kingdom and making alliances, assemble a vast invincible host and keep them content, so that we shall, O king, defeat the sons of Pandu if they reappear.
Duryodhana said, For what reason, O chief of the Bharatas, wilt thou not slay Sikhandin even if thou beholdest him approach thee as a foe with arms upraised?
O Kaurava, I will give him eight elephants with temporal juice always trickling down and tusks as large as poles of ploughs, capable of smiting hostile ranks, and each having eight human attendants.
17 Vaishampayana said, After all the troops had been slain during the hour of sleep by those three car-warriors, king Yudhishthira in great grief said these words unto him of Dasharhas race: ‘How, O Krishna, could my sons, all of whom were mighty car-warriors, be slaughtered by the sinful and wretched Ashvatthama of no great skill in battle?
He, O Shalya, whom thou wouldst be able to frighten in battle is some other person (and not myself)!
O son of the Kuru race, those that reside in the territories of the king, especially those (amongst them) that lead the profession of arms, should always do what is agreeable to the king whether they happen to be known to their monarch or unknown to him.
Thou art well-acquainted, O lord, with the course of time!
O son of Suvala, formerly I strove to compass his destruction.
He next attacked Satyeshu in the sight of all the warriors, like a hungry lion, O king, in the forest, attacking a deer.
And O king of men!
This is that celebrated Yamuna, O king!
Go there, O son of Madri, or return home if thou likest.
Why should he be able to resist my troops and why shouldst not thou be able to slay the hostile troops, O sire?
O best of king, let Yuyutsu, the son of thy loins, be made king, or, indeed, anybody else whom thou mayst wish.
The army of thy son, O Bharata, undergoing such slaughter, began to be agitated here and there by many foremost car-warriors (of the Pandava).
But, O mighty being, we desire to live with thee always.
Never retreating from battle, brave, and resembling Yama himself, Vahlika, O king, is in my judgment, an Atiratha.
The Rishi said, Why, seest thou not, O Brahmana, that a vegetable juice is flowing from this wound of mine?
And, O monarch, having subjugated the whole earth with her mountains, forests, and woods, he made preparations for the great sacrifice called the Rajasuya.
And, O ascetic, how can we secure the same?
Then all kinds of sacred fruits and roots, O Bharata, and flowers and deciduous herbs, in thousands, began to weep, saying, The wicked-hearted and mean Devala will, without doubt, once more pluck and cut us!
Having reflected carefully, act thou thyself, O king.
Those showers of arrows sped from their bows and arms, O monarch, shrouded all the points of the compass like a thick shower of rain poured from the clouds.
Sarmishtha then said, Absolve me, O king, from sin.
The valiant son of Drona then, taking up another bow, covered the grandson of Sini, O Bharata, with a shower of arrows.
Or, what dost thou think, O regenerate one.
Rama, O king, shone in battle, like the Sumeru mountain with streams of liquid metal rolling down its breast, or like the Asoka tree at the advent of spring, when covered with red bunches of flowers, or, O king, like the Kinsuka tree when clad in its flowery attire!
The latter, however, with the greatest ease, O monarch, cut off in twain that terrible scimitar of Subalas son as it coursed towards him in that encounter.
Formerly, O son, thou wert once examined by me in the woods of Dwaita, where thy brothers of great prowess met with (an appearance of) death.
What thy holy self said unto me at that time, O Kesava, through affection, has all been forgotten by me, O chief of men, in consequence of the fickleness of my mind.
O mighty-armed one, no one can rise superior to Time!
By the external acts, O king, I know thy secret purpose.
Having said these words unto Dhritarashtra, that foremost one of Yadus race, O monarch, addressed the grief-stricken Gandhari in these words of high import: O daughter of Subala, thou of excellent vows, listen to what I say!
And, O hull of the Bharata race, having heard of Thus ends the thirty-fourth section in the Rajasuyika Parva of the Sabha Parva.
Settling their words in brief, O king, they charged a certain Brahmana with the task of replying unto the old monarch.
The very clouds, O king, pour, as regards those dwelling in my dominions, showers as much as they desire and when they desire.
He that is compassionate to all creatures, is endued with modesty and acquainted with mighty weapons, is soft and delicate and virtuous,--he that is dear to me,--that mighty bowman Sahadeva, that hero and ornament of assemblies,--he, O Krishna, who is youthful in years, is devoted to the service of his brothers, and is conversant with both virtue and profit, whose brothers, O slayer of Madhu, always applaud the disposition of that high-souled and well-behaved son of mine,--tell me, O thou of the Vrishni race, of that heroic Sahadeva, that foremost of warriors, that son of Madri, who always waiteth submissively on his elder brothers and so reverentially on me.
Do not, therefore, by any means, indulge in such anxiety, because the gods, O Bharata, always set their eyes on affairs worthy of themselves.
Saudasa said, Those jewelled ear-rings, O learned and regenerate Rishi, belong to my wife.
Many hills of food, O king, were dedicated on the occasion.
Dhritarashtra said, Tell me, O Sanjaya, all that the mighty Partha did in battle when they heard that Iravat had been slain.
Even thus, O lord of Earth, we had divided amongst ourselves the hostile army into portion for the share of each.
Else, O king, he will beforehand bring the whole earth obedient to his will.
Why, then, through fear of Karna hast thou come away from battle, O Partha?
O slayer of foes, that blazing fire seemed to him cool.
Do thou, therefore, O king, reap the fruit of thy own acts both here and hereafter.
The father of this youth was, O Matali, the Naga called Chikura.
Sanjaya said, Thy son, Chitrasena, O Bharata, resisted (Nakulas son) Satanika who was engaged in scorching thy host with his keen shafts.
O Bharata, success in this world is attainable on such conditions!
Karna said, I have, O son of Gandhari, said before in thy presence, even these words, vanquish all the Pandavas with their sons and Janardana!
Many huge elephants, whose armour had been cut off with shafts, looked, O king, like mountains divested of clouds at the advent of winter.
The rattle then of Arjunas vehicle rose loud in that battle, resembling, O sire, the tremendous peal of Vasus thunder.
Then, O Bharata, a loud uproar arose among thy troops, beholding the Kuru king proceeding like a fathomless ocean.
O father, let me this very moment go to him.
Therefore, O Brahmana, be graceful unto me so that decrepitude might not touch me.
O highminded one, O king of the snakes, believe all that I say.
Hearing the inmates of the Brahmanas house wailing and indulging in piteous lamentations, Kunti, O king, from compassion and the goodness of her heart, could not bear it with indifference.
O Princess of Panchala, this conduct of thine also, viz.
O Bharata, sink not, for thy own fault, into an ocean of calamity.
That the Pandavas, O best of kings, did not follow thee when thou didst march forth to battle at the head of thy troops, has been an improper act on their part.
O best of men, repentance will be thine (for this thy inaction at present) when in future thou wilt hear of the death of either the Pandavas or thy sons.
From our very birth, O Uluka, that sinful father of thine hath always sought to do us injury and evil.
Still the adorable Soma, O lord of earth, continued to act as before, for pleased with Rohini alone, he continued to live with her exclusively.
O thou of cruel deeds, drag me not so.
And cursed unexpectedly by the god owning a bull for his vehicle, Indra, with joined hands and shaking from head to foot, addressed that fierce god of multi-form manifestations, saving, Thou art, O Bhava, the over-looker of the infinite Universe!
Do not hesitate, O carpenter!
Marutta said, Do thou listen to me, O Samvarta, I did go to Vrihaspati first, but desiring the patronage of Vasava, he did not wish to have me as his sacrificer.
O Krishna, that Arjuna of two arms who always regardeth himself as superior to his namesake of old with thousand arms, and who at one stretch shooteth five hundred arrows, that son of Pandu who in the use of weapons is equal unto king Kartavirya, in energy unto Aditya, in restraint of senses unto a great sage, in forgiveness unto the Earth, and in prowess unto Indra himself,--he, by whose prowess, O slayer of Madhu, the Kurus amongst all the kings of the earth have obtained this extensive empire, blazing with effulgence,--he, whose strength of arms is always adored by the Pandavas,--that son of Pandu, who is the foremost of all car-warriors and whose prowess is incapable of being frustrated,--he, from an encounter with whom in battle no foe ever escapeth with life,--he, O Achyuta, who is the conqueror of all, but who is incapable of being conquered by any,--he, who is the refuge of the Pandavas like Vasava of the celestials,--how, O Kesava, is that Dhananjaya now, that brother and friend of thine?
Meanwhile Suketu, O king, piercing the son of Gautama with nine arrows, once more pierced him with seventy and again with three.
In consequence of this, O tiger of the Kuru race, this tiger-like king of Chedi, so wicked of heart, roareth in such a way caring little for us all.
I will now depart, O son of Pandu.
Thou hadst, O Partha, said unto me in the Dwaita woods that thou wouldst, on a single car, slay Karna.
Rely on me, O daughter!
That battle, O sire, awful as it was, became wonderful to behold.
I, however, still hope to vanquish thee, O Yudhishthira, after curbing the pride, O bull of Bharatas race, of the Pancalas and the Pandus!
Yudhishthira said, Thy daughter, O king, shall be the common wife of us all!
As regards myself, O slayer of foes, I shall cast off my life-breaths dear though they be.‘ 7 Vaishampayana said: That scorcher of foes, Vibhatsu, thus addressed by his maternal uncle, replied, with great cheerlessness of heart, unto Vasudeva who was equally cheerless, saying, ‘O uncle, I am unable to look at this Earth when she is reft of that hero of Vrishni’s race and those my other kinsmen.
Marutta said, I feel as if instilled with new life, by these thy words, O Narada, but O the best of speakers, do thou tell me where I can find Samvarta, and how I can remain by his side, and how I am to act so that he may not abandon me, for I do not desire to live if I meet with a rebuff from him also.
44 Janamejaya said, Thou hast described the merits of the Sarasvati, O best of Brahmanas!
Uplifting a pointed lance, O sire, he hurled it with all the force of his arm at that bull of Sinis race, desirous of slaying him.
O king, it hath been said that virtue alone is the cause of the three, for he that seeketh the three, may, by the aid of virtue alone, grow like fire when brought into contact with a heap of dry grass.
Beholding the slaughter of Karnas sons and the prowess of Nakula, thy army, O bull of Bharatas race, fled away in fear.
O, control thy wrath.
Indeed, O king, both myself and my mother gratified that Rishi.
It behoveth thee, O Lord of the gods, to grant to this youth, for the sake of our happiness, some kind of sovereignty that may be suitable to him and that he may desire.
Yudhishthira answered, This act, O Krishna, done from wrath, of Vrikodaras touching the head of the king with his foot, is not agreeable to me, nor am I glad at this extermination of my race!
Proceed quickly, O Govinda, for the slaughter of the Sutas son.
15 16 17 18 19 20 Dhritarashtra said, Thou didst mention to me before the name of Pandya, that hero of world-wide celebrity, but his feats, O Sanjaya, in battle have never been narrated by thee.
O foremost of monarchs, all this is the result of thy addiction to gambling.
Listen, however, to a few words of mine, O mighty armed one!
Brahman said, O Sesha, O best of snakes, thou art the god Dharma, because alone, with thy huge body, thou supportest the Earth with everything on her, even as I myself, or Valavit (Indra), can.
Thus asked by thee, I have narrated the whole story how Ganga running in three streams, was brought down to the earth for filling the sea; how the mighty saint had drunk up the sea for a particular reason, and how, O lord!
Accept me, O thou giver of proper respect.
Afflicting Arjuna with their shafts like hunters afflicting an elephant with burning brands, those heroes, with outstretched bow, seemed to dance, O Bharata, (on their cars).
O Bharata, it is superfluous then to say that if thou seest neither myself nor Sahadeva nor Krishna, thy dejection will certainly increase.
Therefore, O Dushmanta, cherish thy son, and insult not Sakuntala.
Hearing, however, those harsh words of his brother Phalguna, Pandus son, king Yudhishthira, the just, rising up from that bed (on which he had been sitting), said these words unto Partha, with his heart filled with sorrow, O Partha, I have acted wickedly.
When in the deep woods, fatigued and afflicted with hunger, thou thinkest of thy former bliss, I will, O great monarch, soothe thy weariness.
After the fall of Bhishma and Drona and the mighty car-warrior Karna, after the slaughter of Jayadratha and thy brothers, O sinless one, and thy son Lakshmana, what is there now for us to do?
O Brahmana, behold the wonderful power of my poison.
Therefore, O slayer of Madhu, all of us accompanied by thee, will once more repair unto Devavrata, for asking him about the means of his own death.
And, O king, O bull of the Bharata race, on that occasion no one,--man, woman, or child,--remained in doors, so eager were the citizens for beholding Vasudeva.
Hearing everything from the princes, Bhishma at once understood that the Brahmana was none else than Vaisampayana continued, Thus addressed by the son of Bharadwaja, Bhishma said unto him, String thy bow, O Brahmana, and make the Kuru princes accomplished in arms.
And, O Bharata, only two do not pay tribute unto the son of Kunti, viz., the Panchalas in consequence of their relationship by marriage, and the Andhakas and Vrishnis in consequence of their friendship.
Therefore, should men Draupadi continued, I, therefore, regard, O king, that the time hath come for thee to put forth thy might!
But, O Kavya, I tell thee that he hath deviated from the path of rectitude.
this period is the junction between the Treta and the Kali age, O Kuntis son!
And, O unswerving (prince)!
Hearing it from me, accomplish it thou with patience, and having accomplished it, O king, quell this fever of thine soon.
Vaisampayana said, O most praiseworthy of men!
O best of kings, while enjoying the kingdom that has been founded by the Pandavas, thou seekest protection from others, disregarding the Pandavas themselves.
Therefore, O king, tell me what wish of thine I shall grant today.
At those sounds the Pancalas, O bull of Bharatas race, became inspired with fear.
Then Rama, the son of Jamadagni, gave unto the illustrious son of Dasaratha a celestial arrow and said, Placing this on the bow-string, draw to thy ear, O hero!
Sauti said, the god of fire enraged at the curse of Bhrigu, thus addressed the Rishi, What meaneth this rashness, O Brahmana, that thou hast displayed towards me?
Thou, O king, art born of me, and Vidura of portion or mine!
And those mighty car-warriors, the sons of Pandu, their bodies mangled with shafts and themselves filled with (the result of) the battle, proceeded, O king, towards their encampment, with Bhimasena and Ghatotkacha, O monarch, at their head.
Many a time wert thou, O king, counselled against warring with the Pandavas.
O bull of the Bharata race, I (beg my pardon and) bow to thee.
Come and behold them, O foremost one of Bharata’s race.
And, O Bharata, the high-souled Vasudeva said, O Arjuna, the terror of thine enemies, this whole earth has been conquered by the king, the son of Dharma, relying on the power of thy arms.
Arjuna hearing this, said,--Thou hast never, O Bhimasena, before this uttered such words as these.
Hie thee thither, and appease that adorable god who is known by the names of Sarva, Bedha, Rudra, Sitikantha, Surapa, Suvarcha, Kapardi, Karala, Haryyaksha, Varada, Tryaksha, Pushnodantabhid, Vamana, Siva, Yamya, Avyaktarupa, Sadvritta, Sankara, Kshemya, Harikesa, Sthanu, Purusha, Harinetra, Munda, Krishna, Uttarana, Bhaskara, Sutirtha, Devadeva, Ranha, Ushnishi, Suvaktra, Sahasraksha, Midhvan, Girisa, Prasanta, Yata, Chiravasa, Vilwadanda, Siddha, Sarvadandadhara, Mriga, Vyadha, Indra said, Dost thou, O Vrihaspati, sleep in peace, and are thy servants agreeable to thee, dost thou seek the welfare of the gods, and do the gods, O Brahmana, protect thee?
If thou will, tell me, O chief of the gods, who thou art and what also thou intendst to do!
Restrain thy sons, O monarch, who have from covetousness proceeded too far.
Large numbers of heads severed from trunks and arms and thighs and earrings and other ornaments displaced from the bodies of warriors, O Bharata, and collars and cuirasses and bodies of brave bowmen, and coats of mail, and banners, lay scattered on the ground.
O king, these last are to-day scattered all over the earth.
Then a tumultuous noise arose, O monarch, from among the Pandavas and the Pancalas all of whom were filled with joy.
Brought by his sons to the sacred Sarasvati containing hundreds of tirthas and on whose banks dwelt Rishis unconnected with the world, that intelligent ascetic of austere penance bathed in that tirtha according to due rites, and that foremost of Rishis conversant with the merits of tirthas, then cheerfully said, O tiger among men, unto all his sons, who were dutifully waiting upon him, these words, He that would cast off his body on the northern bank of the Sarasvati containing much water, while employed in mentally reciting sacred mantras, would never again be afflicted with death!
Having cast off their human bodies they have gone there, O chief of Bharata’s race.
O, be gracious unto me and make Bhima accept me.
Let all of you, O Janardana, stand as spectators of the encounter!
During the progress of that battle in which no consideration was showed by anybody for anybody, and while the warriors of thy army and those of the foe were falling fast, and the combatants were all shouting and blowing their conchs, and the bowmen were roaring and uttering loud noises of diverse kinds, while, indeed, the battle was raging fiercely and the very vitals of the combatants were being struck, and the troops, O sire, desirous of victory, were rushing with speed, while, verily, everything on Earth seemed to be undergoing a woeful destruction, during that time when innumerable ladies of birth and beauty were being made widows, during, indeed, the progress of that fierce engagement in which the warriors behaved without any consideration for friends and foes, awful portents appeared, presaging the destruction of everything.
Thou art, therefore, O king, my master and lord as much as Devayanis!
Behold that wicked wight, O son of Pandu!
But, O monarch, Kuvera, the king of the Rakshasas, knowing that his father was angry with him, always sought to please him.
6 Dhritarashtra said, Seeing Dronas son stop at the gate of the encampment, what, O Sanjaya, did those two mighty car-warriors, Kripa and Kritavarma, do?
And the field of battle, strewn with variegated coats of mail and turbans, O sire, looked beautiful like the firmament autumn.
By good luck, O king, thou wert not slain.
O high-souled one, exhibit now thy might.
Having thus, O monarch, turned her course for their sake, the Sarasvati, that foremost of rivers, once more flowed in a westerly direction, as if she said, I must go hence, having prevented the arrival of these Rishis from becoming futile!
One day that best of kings, Yayati, went to Indra and there in course of conversation the lord of Earth was asked by Indra as follows: What didst thou say, O king, when thy son Puru took thy decrepitude on Earth and when thou gavest him thy kingdom?
Further, O Sauti, in this sacrifice that learned Brahmana is the chief.
And Bhimasena, O king, slaughtered the Kurus and all the elephant divisions of the latter.
O sinless one, thou knowest all kinds, of expiation; and thou hast also heard of the virtues of kings as well as the merits of gifts.
And Dhaumya then addressed Jayadratha and said, Do thou, O Jayadratha, observe the ancient custom of the Kshatriyas.
Then Karna, striking Bhimasena with showers Sanjaya said, Thou, O Kaurava, that art thus grieving in view of the present carnage, thou, without doubt, art the root of this destruction of the world!
Then, O king, many Rakshasas came, O Bharata, and lived happily there, drinking the blood that flowed.
Behold, many have died after having slaked their thirst, and many, O Bharata, are dying while drinking.
Vaisampayana said,--O king, learning that the Pandavas had been commanded by the wise Dhritarashtra to return to their capital, Dussasana went without loss of time unto his brother.
O sinless one, I shall accomplish it.
After what hath come to pass, O Sanjaya, I wish to put an end to my life without delay; I do not find the least advantage in cherishing it any longer.
How fortunate, O slayer of Vala, that I behold thee with all thy enemies killed.
And, O monarch, king Dhritarashtra having made this resolution for the pacification of Duryodhana, sent messengers unto Vidura for summoning him.
Thou, O god of fire, said he, residest constantly within every creature, as witness of her or his merits and demerits.
In respect of our bows, therefore, O king, I am superior to Arjuna.
When the day of full moon in the month of Chaitra comes, thou shalt, O great king, repair to that sacrifice of king Yudhishthira the just, for it takes place on that day.
Yudhishthira said, Obtaining thy permission, O preceptor, I will fight without incurring sin, and permitted by thee, O sinless one, I will vanquish all (my) foes.
Through thy fault, O king, all the Kshatriya race hath been exterminated!
Wealth should be spent by one who wisheth to increase his wealth, after the manner, O son of Kunti, of scattering seeds on the ground.
Then thy troops, O king, protected in battle by that firm bowman, cheerfully proceeded against the foe once more from every side.
That head, O king, fell upon the thigh of a great sage named Mahodara and struck to it.
I do not see them here, O Narada.
It is always, O lord, the abode of Munis and Brahmanas.
Vasudeva said, ‘Without beholding those heroes, O Arjuna, who had subjugated all the kings of the Earth and the Daityas a hundred times, I am still alive!
Deprived of his steed and car, and having his standard cut off, O sire, the great bowman (Sutasoma), jumping down from his car, stood on the Earth, having taken up a good bow.
In thy case, O king, begging, which is successful with Brahmanas, hath been forbidden.
Thou hadst, O mighty-armed one, formerly told me,--I will slay the Panchalas with the Somakas--O son of Ganga, tell me, O grandsire (the reason of the present reservation), Bhishma said, Listen, O Duryodhana, to this history, with all these lords of earth, as to why I will not slay Sikhandin even if I behold him in battle!
With that wealth, O king, I will play with thee.
After Trita had said these words, O monarch, his two brothers were seen to be very soon transformed into these shapes in consequence of the words of that truthful sage.
The gods, O king, then commanded that foremost of celestials, viz., Wind, to breathe after that puissant Deity all the fragrance that he carries.
Thus, O possessor of the six attributes, had Agni been cursed in the days of yore by Bhrigu.
O Brahmana, in the golden age, Prajapati had two daughters.
There is the story of Astika that I have related duly Now, tell me, O tiger of Bhrigus race, what else I shall narrate.
It is, therefore, O king, that I have bestowed this child on thee.
Baladeva of great beauty, surrounded by Brahmanas, then went to that spot, O monarch, where Rushangu had, in former days, cast off his body.
Heir to the king of the Matsyas, and born in a noble family, why should I, O prince, make thee do such a reproachable deed?
Thou wert also deprived of thy senses, O hero!
Thereupon Vishnu said, I know, O Sakra, that thy fear proceedeth from Naraka, that lord of the Daityas.
And as Indra is the foremost of celestials, and as the Ganga is the best of rivers, so thou alone art, O king, the greatest of monarchs.
Do not, however, entertain any other purpose, O sinless one!
O chastiser of foes, make without loss of time every arrangement for his reception.
At this, O king, the great bowman and mighty car-warrior Kritavarma, beholding his gold-decked car made driverless and steedless, became filled with rage.
The powerful king of Chedi, beholding Bhima of terrible prowess in such rage, laughingly said,--Release him, O Bhishma!
And virtue, O king, is attainable by one that hath plenty of wealth.
How may we, O Madhava, preserve both our interest and virtue?
O Sesha, ask of me the boon thou desirest.
Then, O monarch, were born many Kshatriyas of greater energy, boys and girls, so that the Kshatriya race, might thrive.
Out of kindness, O hero, do I dissuade thee.
O bull of the Bharata race, with, cheerful hearts let us make peace.
Do thou those acts, O son of Pandu, which should next be done.
Beholding Sahadeva in that plight, the valiant Bhima, filled with rage, O Bharata, held the whole Kuru army in check.
O Yudhishthira, with this resolution, play with us, O Bharata, casting the dice.
Some fled, deserting their kinsmen, O tiger among men, and brothers and other relatives, O monarch!
Surpassing Drona and Bhishma and the Sutas son, O lord, in battle, I will career on the field, O Kauravas, for doing what is agreeable to thee.
3 Dhritarashtra said, ‘O thou of great wisdom, my grief has been dispelled by thy excellent words!
And, O bull of the Hast thou not heard, O king, what the learned Vrihaspati the preceptor of the celestials, said in course of counselling Sakra about mortals and politics?
Then the battle was resumed between the Kurus and the Pandavas, that fierce battle, O king, caused by the match at dice and marked by an awful slaughter.
Arjuna said, Who, indeed, was that Brahmana, O Krishna, and who the pupil, O Janarddana.
O thou of Bharatas race, bring also Krishna of celestial beauty along with them.
Addressing the king in sweet words that were also for his good, he said, Blest be thou, O sinless one!
But, O Sudhanwan, I wish that thou shouldst grant Virochana his life.
Act as it has been laid down truly in the scriptures, and be a king, O great car-warrior!
Then king Yudhishthira, seeing that twilight had come and that his own troops, slaughtered by Bhishma, had thrown aside their weapons, and that stricken with fear, and turned off the field, they were seeking to flee away, and beholding Bhishma also, that mighty car-warrior, excited with wrath and afflicting everybody in fight, and noticing that the mighty car-warriors of the Somakas, having been vanquished, had all become cheerless, Hearing these words of Krishna, Yudhishthira said, It is even so, O thou of mighty arms, even as thou sayest, O thou of Madhus race.
Do thou, O Bharata, watch and observe the character of thy external and internal enemies, (by means of thy spiritual vision), And the man who is able to perceive the nature of the eternal reality is able to overreach the influence of the great fear (perdition).
as soon as he will perceive that the time is come for feats of bravery, then, O most valiant of Sinis race, he also of beautiful hair (Krishna) will defeat Suyodhana.
Then Shalya, that ornament of assemblies, understanding the state of Karnas mind from a survey of his features, addressed that chastiser of foes in words suited to the hour, Do not be grieved, O son of Radha!
O bull among men, one day Drona desirous of testing the comparative excellence of all his pupils in the use of arms, collected them all together after their education had been completed.
O good mother, I dont find him here.
Thou knowest, O mighty-armed one, what the devotion is of king Yudhishthira and what his affection is towards thee, O tiger among kings!
Then after a long time there arose sixty thousand exceedingly powerful sons of that same king--gifted with unmeasured strength, they were born, O ruler of earth!
And, O venerable sir, the mightiest of Bharatas race, we have heard that Vasistha comforted Indra (when he was thus afflicted) and that the god of a hundred sacrifices slew Vritra in his body by means of his invisible thunderbolt, and know, O prince, that this religious mystery was recited by Sakra to the great sages, and they in turn told it to me.
Do thou answer them, O foremost of all persons conversant with duties.
Then that lady of large eyes that were of a reddish hue addressed that god in the midst of the seven Rishis, saying, If, O divine one thou art gratified with me, then let this spot be an excellent tirtha!
Karna said, Tell us thyself, O tiger among men, for thou art the wisest of kings.
I swear by all my religious acts, by all the gifts I have made, by truth itself, and my silent meditations, O king, that I shall today slay the Somakas!
That task, O Shalya, depends on me.
Vaisampayana continued, Utanka, however, O monarch, once more, said these words,--Do thou command me, O mother.
Knowing all this, O monarch, permit the Pandavas to re-visit their ancestral kingdom.
And when all the trees of the spot had been pulled down and crushed into fibres by them endeavouring to kill each other, then, O Bharata, those two of mighty strength, taking up rocks, began to fight for a while, like unto a mountain and a mighty mass of clouds.
Without doubt, O son of Pandu, thou art destitute of faith and thy understanding is not good.
Thou shouldst, however, O sinless one, assure me that thou dost not say what is untrue.
Vidura said, O son of Vichitravirya, Manu, the son of the Self-created, hath, O king, spoken of the following seven and ten kinds of men, as those that strike empty space with their fists, or seek to bend the vapoury bow of Indra in the sky, or desire to catch the intangible rays of the sun.
Himavat gave unto Agnis son two companions, O King, Suvarchas and Ativarchas.
Enveloped by that smoke, the palaces could no longer be seen, O Bharata.
I have five sons, O Brahmana, let one of them go, carrying in thy behalf tribute of that Rakshasa.
How is it, O Kshatta, that thou dost not fear this sin?
O monarch, it is, indeed difficult to hide the marks of the bowstring on my arms.
Having said these words, O Bharata, Duryodhana, that repressor of foes, again asked Sanjaya, in order to ascertain the proceedings of Yudhishthira bent upon war.
Dhritarashtra said, After Arjuna had got the ruler of the Sindhus within sight, what, O Sanjaya, did the Panchalas, attacked by Bharadwajas son, do, encountering the Kurus?
Costly beds, beautiful damsels, mansions decked with excellent furniture, and sport of the delightful kind, without doubt these all wait but at thy command, as in the case of the gods themselves Therefore, O proud one, why dost thou grieve, O son, as if thou wert destitute.
61 Dhritarashtra said, Beholding Duryodhana struck down in battle by Bhimasena, what, O Sanjaya, did the Pandavas and the Srinjayas do?
This child of that wicked foe of thine hath now come to thee, O mighty-armed hero.
There, in that tirtha, O monarch, Sthanu (Mahadeva) had practised the austerest penances.
It behoveth thee to forgive me also any harsh words that I may have at any time uttered against thee or any act that I may have done against thee from anger or inconsiderateness!-- Bhishma said,--If, indeed, thou art unable to cast off this fierce animosity, I permit thee, O Karna!
How lucky, O king, O foremost of monarchs, O lord, it is that I see thee, so virtuous a soul, a treasure-house of righteousness, freed with thy followers from this.
Nor needst thou be bashful, O thou of lovely hips.
I can bear, on a single feather of mine, O Sakra, this Earth, with her mountains and forests and with the waters of the ocean, and with thee also stationed thereon.
Arjuna said, What is this act of thine, O king, that abandoning thy brothers, thou proceedest on foot, face eastwards, to the hostile host?
I do not behold a match for him in battle save thee, O tiger among men, that art possessed of prowess equal to that of a tiger.
Vaisampayana continued,--Unto Bhima who had spoken these words Bhishma and Drona and Vidura said, Forbear, O Bhima.
Tell me also, O Sanjaya, that which was done by my son, the wicked Duryodhana, that lord of the earth, the sole survivor of so many men, when he saw his army exterminated.
Verily, I wish to obey thy behest, O lord of Earth, agreeably to the scriptures.--Thus addressed by that celebrated Brahmana, the king, hearing repeated and hot sighs, said not a word in reply.
O possessor of great powers, O lord, you never spoke words that were vain.
By my weapon, O monarch, I swear this before thee.
Indeed, O king, whoever amongst them took up in wrath a few blades of the Eraka grass, these, in his hands, became soon converted into a thunderbolt, O puissant one.
Even this was the case with thyself, O king (when thou madest me over to Galava).
If thou wishest it would be well for us now to go to Panchala; we have not seen that country, it will, no doubt, O hero, prove delightful to us.
That which thou askest we all shall cheerfully do, O nephew!
This thy challenge of Arjuna, O Sutas son, is like that of a foolish young little deer of activity challenging a huge lion excited with wrath.
And having reached the gate of that city, thou must place a dead body somewhere near it, and the man who shall turn away on seeing the corpse, do thou, O prince, know that man to be Samvarta, and knowing him, do thou follow his footsteps wheresoever that powerful man chooses to go and finding him (at length) in a lonely place thou must seek his protection with thy hands clasped together in supplication to him.
Karna said, As long as Gangas son liveth, O king, I shall never fight.
If, O mighty king, it behoveth thee not to make us wretched for life, observe thou fully the ordinance of the Vedas, (which inculcateth that) verily the deceitful ought to be slain by deceit.
I am yet alive, when, O Pandava, I should die.
Then the Pandavas, O king, rushed against the Kauravas for battle.
The shafts, O chief of men, of thy sire were never bootless as they fell.
Then Bhimasena and Dhrishtadyumna, O sire, and Nakula and Sahadeva and king Yudhishthira the Just, loudly shouted, Come, Strike, Rush!
I also, O child (engaged in beneficial ceremonies), shall sit here for your welfare.
Ravi, Vaisampayana said, Thus, O great king, was the sun that purifier of the world, adored (by Yudhishthira).
There, O Bharata, Arshtishena had in former days undergone the austerest of penances.
Like the wind dispersing in the summer masses of clouds in the welkin, Arjuna dispersed, O king, all those diverse divisions of thy sons.
There is none else for holding the reins of Karnas steeds, except thee, O thou of great good fortune, thou that art the equal of Vasudeva in battle.
There, O monarch, at the sacrifice of the high-souled Yayati, the son of Nahusha, the Sarasvati produced milk and clarified butter.
O Prahlada, they who answer falsely those that ask them about morality destroy the meritorious acts of their seven upper and seven lower generations.
The illustrious Isana of fierce energy then said unto him, Act not, O Sakra, ever again in this way.
words, O king, those heroes then marched to battle, summoning Arjuna towards the southern part of the field.
And the Pandavas, O king, afflicted by the shafts shot from Dronas bow, were unable to stay before him.
When thou art also, O monarch, mixing daily with blessed Brahmanas versed in the Vedas and their branches, thou hast little cause for sorrow.
Soon it was seen that that cloud of earthy dust which had arisen became allayed, O bull among men, in consequence of the diverse streams of blood that drenched it on every side.
Duryodhana said, They amongst the Kurus, O son of Kurus race, for whose sake I desired sovereignty, that is, those brothers of mine, O king, all lie dead on the field!
O son of Rohini!
O revered sister, withhold not thy sanction to this which is agreeable to me.
All that the illustrious one (Kanwa) told him, hear now from me, O king!
As a dog from within the precincts of the house of his master barks at a forest-roaming tiger, even so, O Karna, thou barkest at Dhananjaya, that tiger among men.
And the Rakshasa who burnt with desire upon seeing her, became very much delighted and resolved, O good sage, to carry her away who was so blameless in every respect.
Vidura, however, that foremost of intelligent men, approved not his brothers words and spoke thus, I approve not, O king, of this command of thine.
He that paineth another is, O king, to be regarded a foe by him that is pained.
And, O great king, a well-known Danava named Vivindhya, a mighty warrior wielding a large and powerful bow, encountered Charudeshna!
Thou deservest to command us, for all of us are thy sons, O thou that art endued with wealth of asceticism!
Without doubt, O king, Vritra also was slain by the aid of acts!
Do thou tell me, O foremost of regenerate ones, how the king succeeded in obtaining the wealth which Marutta had buried in the Earth.
The tiger said, Why art thou so sorrowful, O wise one!
O son of Pandu, upon Pradyumna speaking thus with cheerful heart, the Yadava host, O hero, remained on the field, and began to fight cheerfully!
Elephant divisions, O monarch, slaughtered by high-souled warriors, dispersed in all directions like wind-tossed clouds.
Nakula, then, O king, said these words, O Uluka, say unto Dhritarashtras son, Suyodhana, of Kurus race that all the words uttered by him have now been heard and their sense understood.
Indeed, O queen, O lady of the fairest complexion, thou too art threatened with danger!
And, O Bharata, listen as I describe that wealth consisting of both manufactures and the produce of the land.
If thou art tired, O king of kings, thou mayst return with me.’ Yudhishthira, however, was exceedingly disconsolate and stupefied by the foul odour.
Impelled from Gandiva, arrows, whose touch resembled that of Indras thunder, striking men and elephants and horses, O king, fell in that battle with a noise like that of winged insects.
And then, with words choked in tears, and sighing repeatedly, she addressed Bhima in these words, powerfully stirring his heart, Signal, O Bhima, must have been my offence of old unto the gods, for, unfortunate as I am.
Vaisampayana continued, Thus addressed, the king once more addressed Utanka and said unto him, Do thou, at my word, go to my venerable queen, O best of men, and ask her, saying,--Give!--She of pure vows, thus solicited by thee, will certainly, at my command, give thee, O foremost of regenerate persons, those jewelled ear-rings of hers without doubt.
And at that time, O great king, bearing an axe on his shoulder, a carpenter came to the forest and approached the spot where lay that being.
O Achyuta, it was for thy sake that the son of Pritha had been welcomed and honoured by us.
Unto that mighty-armed hero, Kunti, after an embrace, said--Depart, O son.
33 Sanjaya said, Whilst Duryodhana, O king, was repeatedly roaring in this strain, Vasudeva, filled with wrath, said these words unto Yudhishthira, What rash words hast thou spoken, O king, to the effect, Slaying one amongst us be thou king among the Kurus.
Therefore, at my word, O king, abandon this wretch of our race.
Then Shalya, laughing, once more said unto Karna as the latter, excited with great wrath and resolved upon Yudhishthiras destruction stood on his car, these words, Him for whose sake Dhritarashtras son always honours thee, slay that Partha, O son of Radha.
But thy sacrifice, O foremost one of Bharatas race, O son of Parikshit, is not inferior to any of those.
Then accomplish this, O Utanka!
Dhritarashtra said, Tell me, O Sanjaya, of that path without terrors by which, obtaining Hrishikesa, salvation may be mine.
Thou couldst not, O king, from parental affection, do it before.
How then, O Bharata, canst thou say unto such a foe words such as these, Fight, selecting the mace as thy weapon, and if thou canst slay one amongst us, thou shalt then be king?
O god among men, the father himself becoming the son rescueth himself from hell.
Then Kripa, O king, and Kritavarma of the Satvata race, both followed him.
Tell me the same, O most praiseworthy of men!
O great ascetic, my weapons of diverse kinds failed to make their appearance.
If, O thou of Vrishnis race, there is anything like righteousness, those words will be true, for then, Krishna, thou wilt thyself accomplish it all.
Those ladies, O monarch, who, while in their houses could not be seen by the very sun, were now, as they proceeded towards the city, exposed to the gaze of the common people.
9 Sanjaya said, Then commenced the battle between the Kurus and the Srinjayas, O monarch, that was as fierce and awful as the battle between the gods and the Asuras.
And, O king, proud of the strength of his arms, Vrikodara goeth, exhibiting them and desiring to do unto his enemies deeds worthy of those arms.
Yudhishthira said, Tell me, O snake, how the incorporal beings translation to heaven, its perception by the senses and its enjoyment of the immutable fruits of its actions (here below), can be comprehended.
King Dhritarashtra is desirous of satisfying his son, who, while himself seeking honours from others, is envious and wrathful, who transgresses the rules for the acquisition Krishna said, I desire, O Sanjaya, that the sons of Pandu may not be ruined; that they may prosper, and attain their wishes.
O preceptor, prostrating myself I ask thee this.
All those things about which we are anxious, O bull among men, are ephemeral.
O lord, the Pandavas have in battle slain the bravest warriors of this my force.
At present, O sire, union with the sons of Pandu is better for thee than thy union with the wicked.
Having thus formed their great array, O Bharata, the Pandavas, and the mighty bowmen of thy army set their hearts on battle.
I desire eagerly, O Madhava, to embrace that hero, the second son of Pandu.
The wretch, in fact, is already gone, being regardless of virtue and because, O lovely dame, of his employing the great saints to carry him.
O, the sinful and wicked-souled (Purochana) who hath burnt those best of men, the innocent and unsuspicious princes, hath himself been burnt to death as fate would have it.
Saying, So be it, the mice then, O bull of Bharatas race, made over all their old and young ones to that cat.
Duryodhana said,--without danger to our friends and other illustrious men, O uncle, tell me if there is any way by which I may vanquish him.
O thou of unfading glory, thou knowest how steady, in truth, is Vibhatsu, otherwise called Savyasachin, how irresistible he is.
Tell now, O Sanjaya, about what remains.
It was here, on the breast of Kailasa, O Galava, that Kuvera, was installed on the sovereignty of the Rakshasas, the Yakshas, and the Gandharvas.
Instructed by me, O Sanjaya, tell them that are afflicted with grief these words: I have performed sacrifices, supported a large number of servants properly, governed the whole earth with her seas!
And, O lord of men, all around there began to flow many rivers covered with foam and turbid with mud; and these bearing volumes of water spread over the frothy rafts rushed down with tremendous roar uprooting trees.
Indeed, all of them follow Duryodhana, except Vidura, O thou of unfading glory, Sakuni, the son of Suvala, and Karna, and Dussasana, all equally foolish, gave foolish and vindictive Duryodhana much improper advice regarding thee.
Seeing the mace hurled at him, thy son, O monarch, moved away from that spot at which the weapon fell down baffled on the earth.
In consequence of thy evil policy, O king, there again occurred in that spot an awful battle between thy warriors and those of the foe, all of whom were inspired with the desire of victory.
It is for this, O king, that desirous of doing thee good, I caused thee to be sent for having a view of Hell.
O Partha, as was said by Vrishaparva, the Gandharvas and the Kimpurushas, in company with their loves, are visible on the summits of the mountain.
O hero, listen also to these agreeable words of ours, promising great good to thee.
Indeed, O son, thou shouldst obey the behests of thy sire.
Vaisampayana continued, Then, O king, undiscovered by that monarch, that lord of men, Sahadeva, maintained by Virata, began to live happily.
And, O Bharata, Duryodhana looketh with such jealousy towards the Pandavas that great harm would be the consequence, if thou didst not interfere.
Clad in diverse kinds of skins, they spoke diverse kinds of languages, O Bharata!
O great king, act thou so that the Kurus may not perish.
And, O king, the Asura who was known as Sukshma, endued with great intelligence and whose achievements also were great, became on earth the famous king Vrihadratha.
Those women that are each devoted to but one lord, they that always speak the truth, they that undergo a period of gestation for full ten months--there is nothing, O Brahmana, that is more difficult than that is done by these.
Art thou not virtuous, O bull among men?
He then, O king, (mentally) performed his ablutions.
When the animals selected for sacrifice were seized, the great Rishis, O king, felt compassion for them.
O thou of handsome face and sweet smiles, women formerly were not immured within houses and dependent on husbands and other relatives.
Fighting hand to hand, O monarch, for a short while those heroic warriors, the followers of the Madra king, were seen to perish.
And, O thou of the elephants tread, this wide earth having the ocean for her boundaries, with her mountains and woods and towns, was once more governed by the Kshatriyas.
O afflicter of thy foes, in compensation for all this vast misery wrought by Dhritarashtras son, thou wilt attain to proportional happiness after having killed thy foes, O great king, O lord of men, the ways of the world are known to thee.
And he repeatedly said unto that chief of the Bharatas, Be pleased with me, Forgive, O king, all that I have said from desire of observing virtue and from fear of sins.
The water of that river, O Shakra, hath been made sacred by the Munis!
Then, O king, amongst those foremost of Kshatriyas, struck with Bhimas shafts, the elephants and cars and horse and foot, set up a loud wail, O monarch, that resembled the din made by mountains when riven with thunder.
The person that doth not act, certainly succumbeth, O Yudhishthira.
Do thou receive it, O king.
And some partook of the nature of Vayu, some of Kumara, some of Brahma, O bull of Bharatas race, and some of Vishnu and some of Surya, and some of Varaha.
O tiger among men, great good will result to thee if thou fully followest those words.
The smallest transgression is not discernible in the high-souled Pandavas, judged by the rules of morality or reason or affection, O scorcher of foes!
Nakula said, Thou art my eldest brother, O Bharata, (beholding) thee proceeding in this way, fear troubleth my bosom.
Thou O god, art the only person competent to slay the foes of these denizens of heaven that have sought thy protection and that solicit thee.
Behold, O Krishna, some one amongst them, taking up some kinsman’s severed head decked with beautiful nose and earrings, is standing in grief.
Men were employed, O king, to cast that powder into the sea.
And he said, Who art thou, O fair one, of nails bright as burnished copper, and with ear-rings decked with celestial gems?
O thou of the beauty of a celestial, O chastiser of foes, hearing thy reply I shall make arrangements for my daughters wedding according to the order to which ye belong.
Bhishma said, I do not, O son of Kunti, see the person who, even if he were the chief of the celestials himself, can defeat me in battle when I fight.
And, O Bharata, when diverse weapons were in this way neutralised and baffled by means of counter-weapons, Rama, of mighty energy began to contend against me in that battle, reckless of his own life.
But, O Nandini, even Viswamitra is taking thee away by force, what can I do in this matter, as I am a forgiving Brahmana?
Take this to heart, O king of the Kurus.
Thou didst not, O Sanjaya, then say what law and morality were, but now thou comest to instruct the son of Pandu!
And, O king, as a fowler killeth the birds we see, so doth sin slay the creatures of the world.
And it so happened that that very day on which Vrikodara was born, was also, O best of Bharatas, the birthday of Duryodhana who afterwards became the ruler of the whole earth.
Vaisampayana continued, Then turning to the wrathful prince Duryodhana, the illustrious Rishi Maitreya addressed him in these soft words, O mighty-armed Duryodhana, O best of all eloquent men, O illustrious one, give heed unto the words I utter for my good!
At these words, O king, the Sarasvati with her waves appeared within that well.
Listen now, O monarch, to these words of mine, spoken according to my wisdom.
And, O king, in consequence of her ascetic merit only half her body became such a river in Vatsabhumi, while with the other half, she remained a maiden as before!
Rise up; let no fear be thine; return to thy city safe and sound, O lord of Earth.
Do all, O king, that those counsels seem to indicate, for reliance on the gods, when supported by human exertion, always, O king, leadeth to success, If these two do not go hand-in-hand, success becometh unattainable.
5 Sanjaya said, Thus addressed by the celebrated grandson of Gotama, the king (Duryodhana), breathing long and hot breaths, remained silent, O monarch.
Do not, O mighty-armed one, entertain any fear of Dhananjaya.
O king, if thou hadst obtained the sovereignty before, we would certainly have succeeded to it, however much the people might be unfavourable to us.
O Surendra, this excellent Brahmana, the younger brother of Vrihaspati is engaged in performing my sacrifices.
I desire to hear this, O foremost of regenerate persons, and therefore have I asked thee.
Surpassing by his own lightness the lightness of Yuyudhana, hast thou been angry, O thou of Vrishnis race?
Stain with their Yudhishthira said, When thou, O king, art thus subject to grief, sovereignty does not please me at all.
O, let my wish be crowned with fruition through the grace of that foremost of Rishis.
Sukra (hearing this) said, Welcome art thou, O Kacha!
Trita, O king, with a cheerful heart was walking before them.
Then Vivaswat of great energy said unto that best of Rishis, Welcome art thou, O great Rishi!
Let me soon meet thee again, O Janardana!
That thou shouldst go there, O Madhava, is what I think to be proper, for pacifying Gandhari, O chastiser of foes, who is blazing with wrath!
O giver of honours, that I am yet present in battle is because that one like me should be present here.
That son of thine, completely possessed by lust and wrath is now the slave of delusion, and is, therefore, incapable, O king, of being now forcibly turned back by thee.
O king of men, it behoveth thee to act faithfull, according to those words thou hadst spoken unto me before in the presence of the guardians of the worlds.
O excellent one, ask thou another boon, for I will give it.
Thyself also, O hero, art acquainted with every weapon.
I shall, for this, O king, speedily proceed to Samantapanchaka.
O thou beautiful one, he that suppresseth his anger earneth prosperity.
For, O Brahmana, there is not a man on the face of this earth, who is free from the sin of doing injury to creatures.
O lord, O thou art the refuge of all creatures.
Vaisampayana continued,--The great ascetic Narada, having answered Yudhishthira thus, again asked that just ruler,-Do the officers of thy government, O king, that are paid from the taxes levied on the community, take only their just dues from the merchants that come to thy territories from distant lands impelled by the desire of gain?
Acts are very efficacious, O king, and nothing else so, O Yudhishthira!
There is, however, a question, O scorcher of foes, which I wish to ask thee.
Gradually, O king, they have all attained to excellent regions of felicity.
Vaisampayana continued, The monarch, then, O thou of Bharatas race, seeing the purity of his son established by the celestial messenger, became exceedingly glad.
The diadem-decked Arjuna, reflecting on that endeavour of theirs, forbade those heroes, with conciliatory speeches, O chastiser of foes.
Save thee there is no other person in either heaven or the whole of this world, who, O son of Kurus race, would be able to slay the ruler of the Madras while excited with wrath in battle.
Duryodhana also, O king, penetrated the mighty host of the high-souled Pandavas vigorously struggling in battle.
And, O possessor of dreadful prowess, depending on the strength of thy arms, I shall reach the Gandhamadana, unhurt, together with Panchalas daughter.
Be propitious unto us, O thou best of kings!
When I heard that Arjuna, having bent the bow, had pierced the curious mark and brought it down to the ground, and bore away in triumph the maiden Krishna, in the sight of the assembled princes, then, O Sanjaya I had no hope of success.
Dhritarashtra said, Hearing of those feats of the sons of Pandu which are incapable of being achieved by the gods themselves, my heart, O Sanjaya, is filled with fear and wonder.
Vasishtha continued, Then, O child, Aurva cast the fire of his wrath into the abode of Varuna.
Vaisampayana said, O king, after Vidura had gone to the abode of the Pandavas, Dhritarashtra, O Bharata, of profound wisdom, repented of his action.
And others, O sire, the son of Pritha pierced, each with two or three arrows.
After thy return from Kurukshetra, O delighter of the Kurus, thy sire, O king, proceeded towards Gangadwara.
In their presence, O king, I will tell thee everything about the intensions of Kesava and Partha.
Then all the celestials, coming to Soma, O king, asked him, saying, Why is it that thy form is not so beautiful and resplendent (as before)?
O, fie on Dhritarashtras heart which is so partial.
Thou hast witnessed it with thy own eyes, O mighty-armed one, how Ghatotkaca, screened by his illusions and displaying hundreds of still slain that night (by Karna).
O blessed one, I have kept ready on the stream a boat capable of withstanding both wind and wave.
Karna said, O ruler of the Madras, be thou ever engaged in our good as Brahman in that of Ishana, as Keshava in that of Partha.
Are the merchants, O king, treated with consideration in thy capital and kingdom, capable of bringing their goods thither without being deceived by the false pretexts of (both the buyers and the officers of government)?
And it was under Vibhishanas guidance, O king, that Rama with all his troops crossed the great ocean by means of that bridge in course of a month.
He that, by his evil deeds, afflicted the sons of Pandu, who are all wedded to virtue and undeserving of destruction, he that hateth them even now,--that sinful man, O monarch, who is none else than thy son,--should, with all his adherents, be checked by all means.
O Bharata, taking us on thyself, proceed thou as before.
The prince then, O bull of Bharatas race, pierced Uluka with sixty arrows.
Do thou, O son of Kunti, rest a while with those that follow thee!
O king, what can be done by me when (it seemeth) thou hast not heard anything before from virtuous old men giving lessons in morality?
Accept thou that object, and do not, O king, exterminate the population of the earth.
My heart, O Krishna, is naturally attracted towards virtue.
Some had their poles or yokes or wheels broken, O king!
In this connection, is cited, O beautiful lady, this ancient narrative of a discourse between the senses and the mind.
The top of the vehicle, which had before been burnt by Drona and Karna with their celestial weapons, quickly blazed forth to ashes, O king, without any visible fire having been in sight.
Even thus it hath been ordered, O monarch, by our mother.
And then others among the common soldiers, beholding them stop, stopped of their own accord, O king, from shame and desire of displaying their courage unto one another.
Similarly, though struck repeatedly with the force of Bhimas mace, Shalya, O king, moved not, like a mountain assailed by an elephant with his tusks.
O thou possessed of wealth of asceticism, I deem myself cleansed by having listened to this account.
And after the illustrious Krishna, the son of Devaki, had departed (from Indraprastha) having acquired that great victory and having also dispelled the fears of the kings, that feat, O Bharata, swelled the fame of the Pandavas.
Yudhishthira said,--I have, O son of Suvala, one thousand musty elephants with golden girdles, decked with ornaments, with the mark of the lotus on their temples and necks and other parts, adorned with golden garlands, with fine white tusks long and thick as plough-shafts, worthy of carrying kings on their backs, capable of bearing every kind of noise on the field of battle, with huge bodies, capable of battering down the walls of hostile towns, of the colour of new-formed clouds, and each possessing eight she-elephants.
Then, O king, Kunti with her sons saluted the Brahmana (in whose house they had dwelt) and set out for the delightful town of the illustrious Drupada.
O repressor of foes, I do not, even after reflection, behold any grave fault in me, or even O Kesava, any fault however minute.
It cannot be, O Karna, that all the people of a country are sinful.
Seeing this, O lord, I am dancing in great joy!
77 78 Dhritarashtra said, When our troops were broken in battle by Bhimasena, what, O Sanjaya, did Duryodhana and Subalas son say?
And, O thou of great good fortune, it behoveth thee to tell me in full the object for which those Maharathas, equal unto the celestials themselves, were born on earth.
I replied unto him, O thou of mighty arms, after the manner I myself had heard, O chastiser of all foes.
O king, none can by nature be any persons foe.
Beholding that car cased in tiger skins and looking like a cloud, the Pandus and the Pancalas, O monarch, became terrified.
O represser of foes, this is the time to slay Duryodhana with his adherents.
These arrows will not, O Alarka, cross through me at all.
O thou of great strength, the most excellent of the wives of the gods and Gandharvas resort to this place, and the time of their arrival is nigh.
Go, O monarch, and rule the earth destitute of lords, without warriors, reft of wealth, and without citadels, as thou choosest!
Vaisampayana said, The wicked Duryodhana became very pleased when the king, O Bharata, had said so unto Pandavas.
All the points of the compass, O king, became serene.
King Dhritarashtra, with ministers, sons, and friends, hath with a joyous heart, O king, repeatedly enquired after thy welfare.
Let us, O father, by means of trusted and skilful and adroit Brahmanas, seek to produce dissensions between the sons of Kunti and Madri.
Agni said, I shall presently, O adorable one, repair thither as thy messenger, to present Vrihaspati to king Marutta; and to make Indras words true, and to show respect to Vrihaspati, Agni departed.
Vaisampayana continued, O king, expressing their satisfaction in this strain, Duryodhana and others, bent on evil machinations, returned merrily to their respective homes.
Many foremost of elephants pierced with arrows winged with gold, looked beautiful like mountains, O sire, whose summits are lighted with blazing brands.
Then these two heroic and mighty warriors, O monarch, both deprived of car, and both armed with mace, sported in battle like two crests of hills.
With that arrow, O best of kings, the son of Pandu cut off from Sushenas trunk the latters head in the very sight of all the troops.
O thou conversant with all duties, tell me truly which of these is meritorious?
Horsemen, O monarch, wandering hither and thither, were seen to fall down deprived of life by the shafts of Partha.
Slay him, therefore, O lord, without much delay.
And Parikshit married Madravati, thy mother, O king, and thou art born to her, O Janamejaya!
After the fall of Shalya, O king, none amongst thy troops set his heart on either rallying the army or displaying his prowess.
O monarch, the goddess Earth with her boundless extent with girth of seas, with her mountains and forests, and towns and cities and mines, and decked with woodlands and hills is now thine!
This is the truth, O Yudhishthira!
Tell me now, O Sanat-sujata, about asceticism that is stained by faults!
Indeed, at that time, the Kuvara, the wheels, the shaft, the traces, the yoke, and the Anukarsha, O lord, of Arjunas car, became entirely enveloped with arrows.
O king, where is there any happiness for him!
Many a time, O Partha, he strove to withdraw me from thee, but I never reckoned those wicked attempts of his.
Then all those Brahmanas, O king, worshipping Mahadeva, that lord of the universe and protector of all creatures, with penance and vows and fasts and diverse kinds of abstinences and painful observances, emancipated that foremost of rivers, the divine Sarasvati.
He that reads of this great battle, which is like unto a sacrifice, between the high-souled Dhananjaya and Adhirathas son, so also he that hears the account of this battle read, both obtain, O Bharata, the fruit of a great sacrifice duly performed.
Many warriors, issuing out of the Pandava array, O Bharata, slew thy troops in a moment in that battle.
From that time when I heard that the sons of Kuntibhojas daughter had been burnt to death, I was, O son of Gandhari, ill able to meet any living creature.
Dhritarashtra said, What Vidura told me at the time of the game at dice, If thou seekest, O king, to vanquish the Pandavas (at dice), then certainly a terrible blood-shed ending in the destruction of all the Kurus will be the result, I think it is about to be realised.
O monarch, this great and awful destruction of the world, swelling the (population of the) domains of Yama, hath arisen from thy misconduct and that of thy sons.
considering the (astrological) moment at which thou hast proffered thy prayer to me, sixty thousand sons, O foremost of choice men valorous and characterised by exceeding pride, will be born in one off thy two wives (here).
If thou hadst slain the king, O Partha, what wouldst thou have done after that?
The carless Srutarvan then, O king, took up a sword and shield.
It is said, O Matali, that when the end of the world cometh, mighty fire burst forth from within it, and spreading consumeth the three worlds with all their mobile and immobile objects.
If, by bowing unto king Yudhishthira sovereignty may still remain to us, even that would be for our good, and not, O king, to sustain through folly defeat (at the hands of the Pandavas).
And whose daughter, O beautiful one?
Everyone, it seems, when afflicted by Time, is stupefied, O Bharata, since even thou, O king, as regards this matter, did act so foolishly!
O thou of little intelligence, thinkest thou not of Bhimasena filled with wrath?
Our woes assuaged, we are, O son, living happily in the house of this Brahmana, respected by him and unknown to Dhritarashtras son.
In this hour of distress, O Soul of the universe, I offer up my own self as the sacrificial victim, from devotion to thee and with heart concentrated in meditation!
And at that time when the earth was bereft of Kshatriyas, the Kshatriya ladies, desirous of offspring, used to come, O monarch, to the Brahmanas and Brahmanas of rigid vows had connection with them during the womanly season alone, but never, O king, lustfully and out of season.
Cased in mail and always exerting myself actively, I can, O Bharata, annihilate this large force, according to this arrangement as regards both number and time.
The head of Namuchi also fell into that stream, O Bharata, and the Asura obtained many eternal regions, O best of kings, that granted every wish.
Daruka said, He is certain to have victory whose charioteership, O tiger among men, hath been taken by thee.
Vaisampayana said, Then that mighty bowman of blazing splendour, Arjuna, smilingly said unto Chitrasena in the midst of the Gandharva host, What purpose dost thou serve, O hero, in punishing the Kauravas?
O foremost of regenerate persons, go to Heaven.
Then the nymphs said, O Indra, O slayer of Vala, we shall so endeavour to allure him that thou wilt have nothing to fear at his hands.
Sanjaya said, Thus urged by thy son, O great king, the mighty king of the Kalingas, accompanied by a large army advanced towards Bhimas car.
O giver of honours, the brothers, then, of Arjuna, with all their followers, will not be able to live for even a moment in a world that is destitute of Arjuna!
Remember, O ruler of men, that thou art the cause of all this!
And while he was seated restless with anxiety and sighing in grief, Sanjaya approaching him said, O lord of the earth having now obtained the whole earth with all its wealth and sent away the sons of Pandu into exile, why is it, O king, that thou grievest so?
O bull among Kshatriyas, let not the whole Kshatriya race be slaughtered on thy account.
Gift, sacrifice, respect for the wise, study of the Vedas, and honesty, these, O king, constitute the highest virtue and are efficacious both here and hereafter.
great might At the command, O child, of Brahma, thou hast been born among men!
Thou mayest take the foolish son of Dhritarashtra to be dead, O thou of Vrishnis race, if, O Krishna, he does not today fly away from the battle to be waged by me!
Therefore, O monarch, though overtaken by this calamity, be calm still, and listen, O sire, to the (account of the) battle as I recite it.
Beholding those wonderful portents, the Pancalas and the Pandavas, O bull of Bharatas race, became filled with anxiety.
Truly, if it is fit to be heard by me, do thou then tell me, O lord!
Then Indra, O Yudhishthira, went to him and addressed him saying, Wherefore, O sage, hast thou become engaged in practising such rigid austerities?
At that time, however, O monarch, the Bhojas and Andhakas, impelled by the perverseness of the hour that had come upon them, all became as one man and surrounded the son of Sini.
O thou foremost of intelligent men, I think we should choose them for the growth of our race.
O hero, that incomparable form of thine, which thou at that time hadst had, in bounding over the main, that abode of sharks and crocodiles.
If, O Madhava, we are, in the observance of the practices of our order, cut off with weapons in battle, when our end comes, even that will lead us to heaven.
Obedient to the counsels of Madhava in Bhimasena said, O Arjuna, O Vibhatsu, listen to these words of mine.
The wish, therefore, O auspicious one, that thou cherishest shall be accomplished!
When Partha, called also Savyasaci, taking up his celestial bow, will scorch the (Kuru) army and afflict thee exceedingly with keen shafts, then, O Sutas son, wilt thou repent (of thy folly).
If thy mind, O Bhishma, delighteth so in praising others, then praise thou these kings, leaving off Krishna.
O son of Vicitravirya, creatures obtain weal or woe as the fruit of their own acts.
Bhishma, continued, Listen, O mother, to me as I indicate the means by which the Bharata line may be perpetuated.
Urge the steeds, O Hrishikesa, I will do thy bidding.
In the same way, O mighty-armed one, thou hast given us aid, O thou of unfading glory!
O king, is capable of being perceived by thee.
I shall slay all these even now, and rule thou the whole earth, O king, without a rival.
Now, O best of monarchs, O hero, hath the earth been rid of foes.
Then those two brothers, O monarch, with their straight shafts, cut off Nakulas car into fragments.
The royal sage, Kalmashapada, that cherisher of friends, answered the Brahmana, saying, Stay thou here, O Brahmana for a moment.
O child, Indra took compassion upon her, and asked her, saying, O auspicious one!
Then Karnas son, O king, in that dreadful battle, cut off, with his mighty shafts, the shield, decked with a 1,000 stars, of Nakula, while he was careering with great activity in those beautiful motions.
Reflecting upon this, Devala, O best of kings, abandoned the religion of Domesticity and adopted that of Moksha.
Then Duryodhana challenged all the Pandavas to battle, O chief of Bharatas race, like the Asura Vali in days of yore challenging all the celestials.
O foremost of Brahmanas!
O conqueror of Paka, these endeavours of mine have been for Vedic lore.
21 Dhritarashtra said, When Pandya had been slain and when that foremost of heroes, viz., Karna was employed in routing and destroying the foe, what, O Sanjaya, did Arjuna do in battle?
Bound by the chains of the senses and women and wealth and other sweet things of life, diverse evil practices also approach him then, O king!
Ourselves, as also all the kings, O Karna will, follow thee in battle.
O thou that art conversant with virtue, it hath been said that a Brahmana is ever the friend of every creature.
Upon whomsoever amongst the warriors I then cast my eyes, O monarch, I beheld that every one, O Bharata, was struck by thy son with his arrows.
Then when this religion has been duly practised, O mower of foes, thou wilt become freed from all thy sins and attain to absolute emancipation.
O best of regenerate ones, these ear-rings, day and night, always produce gold.
I do not, O king, see the man except Dhrishtadyumna, who is able to withstand Bhishma of great vows.
Without doubt, O grandsire, the sons of Pandu are being favoured by thee, inasmuch as thou forgivest, O hero, this slaughter of my army.
Alas, O Vasudeva, the wives of my proud children possessed of prowess like that of infuriated elephants, are now exposed to the gaze of common people.
Duryodhana, beholding the heroic Alayudha slain, became, O Bharata, filled with anxiety, for all his troops.
That soul of all creatures, Sanjaya said, Listen, O king!
O thou of beautiful hips and sweet smiles, hearing what thou hast to say I shall act suitably.
As long as these troops do not fly away beholding thee, in their midst and witnessing also the destruction of their elephant-force, do thou, O chastiser of foes, endeavour to slay Duryodhana!
And having consulted with Sudeshna thus, Kichaka went to princess Draupadi, and like a jackal in the forest accosting a lioness, spoke unto Krishna these words in a winning voice, Who and whose art thou, O beautiful one?
The broad-chested and mighty-armed son of Pritha, more afflicted than his uncle, with eyes bathed in tears, touched his uncle’s feet, O Bharata.
I shall take, O king, thy weakness and decrepitude.
Nor, O regenerate Rishi, it is sinful to wear ornaments (on such an occasion).
Bhishma said, The next day, O bull of Bharatas race, frightful again was the combat that wok place between me and Rama when I encountered him once more.
Then at twilight, O king, thy sire Devavrata, his animals having been tired, caused the troops to be withdrawn.
Sivi then addressed the king thus, I am, O king, Sivi by name, the son of Usinara.
73 74 75 Dhritarashtra said, In that awful and fathomless encounter of the Pandavas and the Srinjayas with the warriors of my army, when Dhananjaya, O sire, proceeded for battle, how, indeed, did the fight occur?
Sanjaya continued, Then king Duryodhana stopped Karna and Shalya (from going on with their wordy warfare), addressing the son of Radha as a friend, and beseeching Shalya with joined hands, Karna, O sire, was quieted by thy son and forbore saying anything more.
It is even so, O monarch.
I had prohibited thee, O my son, from visiting the residence of Raivya; but alas!
And Upamanyu thus addressed, replied, Your words, O Aswins, have never proved untrue.
Janamejaya said, When the high-souled Kesava and Arjuna after slaying their enemies repaired to the assembly rooms, what conversation, O regenerate one, took place between them?
O Janardana, desisting from this act seemeth to me to be beneficial.
Markandeya said, Listen, O prince of Bharatas race, to this old history exactly as it happened!
Vaisampayana continued,--King Duryodhana, thus addressed by Sakuni, without allowing a moment to elapse, said unto Dhritarashtra,--This, Sakuni, an adept at dice, is ready to win at dice, O king, the wealth of the sons of Pandu.
Today, O Shalya, I will shoot shafts with great energy for the destruction of the Pandavas and the victory of Duryodhana.
Tell me, O Brahmana, who those people are, who have caused thee pain, so that I may kill them all.
If with Bhishma, and Drona, and Kripa, and Karna, and Vivingsati, and Aswatthaman, Vikarna, and Somadatta, and Vahlika and the chief of the Sindhus, and the ruler of the Kalingas, and Sudakshina, the king of the Kamvojas, there were Yudhishthira, and Bhimasena and Savyasachin, and the twins, and if Satyaki of mighty energy, and Yuyutsu, that mighty car warrior, are stationed, who is there, O bull of Bharatas race, of such misdirected intelligence that would fight these?
Bhima said,--If I had not known, O Dhananjaya, that the king had acted according to Kshatriya usage, then I would have, taking his hands together by sheer force, burnt them in a blazing fire.
Having acted falsely in the matter of thy duty, O son of Nahusha, thou hast been guilty of the sin of theft.
51 52 Janamejaya said, Why, O regenerate one, did that maiden betake herself to ascetic penances, in days of old?
We are all, O Rishi, at thy disposal, and at that of the high-souled Krishna.
If the sun sets to-day, the Rakshasa living yet, O Bharata, I will not any more say that I am a Kshatriya.
Dhritarashtra said, This evil-minded son of thine, O Gandhari, is resolved to sink in misery.
Thou, O hero, art the foremost of all friends of both the Pandavas and the Kurus, even as Prajapati is of both the gods and the Asuras.
Once more Partha of great energy said unto Krishna, that chastiser of foes, these words, Urge the steeds, O Hrishikesha, for time passeth.
She seemed to take away diverse kinds of spirits, with dishevelled hair and tied together in a cord, as also, O king, many mighty car-warriors divested of their weapons.
Let us, therefore, O king, begin the play.
O Sanjaya, I am equally capable of war and peace.
What hast thou done, O best of men, in killing me who have given thee no offence?
When I am alive, O Kauravya, never indulge in any grief.
The god, with a cheerful heart, once more said unto him Let thy asceticism increase a thousandfold, O Brahmana, through my grace!
Sanjaya continued, Hearing these words of poignant grief the illustrious Yudhishthira addressed thy son Duryodhana who was still within those waters, saying, Do not utter such ravings of sorrow, O sire, from within the waters!
This act of thine, O Janardana, this lightness of heart, seems to me like the drying up of the ocean or the locomotion of Meru.
Vaisampayana continued,--Unto Yudhisthira after he had said this, Krishna, extolling his virtues, said.--Thou, O tiger among kings, deservest imperial dignity.
Besides this, O son of Kunti, we cannot withdraw without engaging in battle.
Those words of thine, O princess, have now been accomplished!
Thou, O hero, art devoted to truth, it is well-known all over the earth!
We have, O king, happily passed in thy abode the period of non-discovery, like infants in the womb!
So also, O king, Bhishma of great wisdom, the son of Santanu, with all the Kurus, enquired after thy welfare in every respect.
Give unto Kesava, O king, that object in expectation of which, from desire of benefiting both parties, he cometh to the Kurus.
Indeed, O king, thy son then looked resplendent like a golden cliff.
But thou hast, O Bhimasena, committed a deed which will offend even the gods.
And, soon, O bull of Bharatas race, the king asked Sanjaya of soul worthy of praise,--saying,--O Sanjaya, these kings, these lords of earth, so brave and taking delight in battle, are for smiting one another with weapons of diverse kinds, being prepared to lay down their very lives for the sake of earth.
Thus cut off, (half of) that large scimitar suddenly fell down on the Earth, while half of it, O Bharata, continued in the grasp of Sutasoma.
Tell me, O Sanjaya, who were those heroes that approached the son of Bharadwaja, beholding him at the head of his forces?
Wending away quickly from the field of battle, O king, those heroes, with hearts agitated by grief, began to reflect anxiously and earnestly.
Sanjaya continued, 2,000 cars, 700 elephants, 5,000 horse, and 10,000 foot, this was the remnant, O monarch, of the mighty host of the Pandavas.
these words, the king, deeply afflicted with grief, O monarch, touched water, and exclaimed in sorrow, Let all creatures, mobile and immobile, listen to me.
O foremost of the Bharatas, even by staying here, ye shall hear those sounds; do ye by no means feel inclined to repair thither.
Hearing these words of the returned messengers, O bull of Bharatas race, king Yudhishthira became filled with great anxiety and began to breathe heavily.
The divine Mahadeva then, addressing Arundhati, said unto her, Solicit thou the boon, O auspicious dame, which is in thy heart!
Or, O Vrikodara, let me alone slay the Rakshasa.
Dhritarashtra said, When those divisions (of mine), O Sanjaya, were broken and routed, and all of you retreated quickly from the field, what became the state of your minds?
All this, however, O king, was due to thy evil policy!
I ask thee this, O son, of Kunti!
Then, O Bharata, the mighty son of Pandu was struck in the chest with three arrows by thy angry son armed with bow.
Encompassed by that elephant force, O Bharata, the five brothers looked beautiful, O tiger among men, like the planets surrounded by the clouds.
And how, O Kshatta, doth Dhaumya proceed along?
For this reason, O thou of mighty arms, it behoveth thee to forgive me that beseech and bow to thee this transgression, O king, of both myself and Arjuna, committed for maintaining the truth.
Even thus, O monarch, all those tigers among men, desirous of slaughtering their foes, encountered one another at dawn of day, O lord.
O thou of black eyes, women endued with such disposition and possessed of such auspicious marks, can never suffer misfortune long.
Vaisampayana continued, After this, O Bharata, Yudhishthira, Kunti and Dhrishtadyumna discoursed upon this matter.
In this manner, O sinless one, Arjuna showed his profound skill in the use of sword, bow, and mace, walking over the lists in circles.
Both armies, O monarch, teeming with joyous men, stood, eager for battle and (ready) to destroy each other without delay.
O lord, it was by thee that that wicked Asura, Jambha by name, who was a mighty bowman and who always obstructed sacrifices, was slain.
Do thou, O Yadu, take this my weakness along with my decrepitude.
O thou of immeasurable prowess, although we are devoted to thee, still thou never seekest our welfare.
Solidifying the waters by means of his power of illusion, by, indeed, a wonderful method, thy son Duryodhana, O Bharata, happened to be within that lake.
Once more, O monarch, that battle became general and awful.
O grandsire, were noticed by thee and declared in the assembly.
My two sisters Amvika and Amvalika, who were abducted with me at the same time, have, O king, been bestowed by Gangas son on his younger brother Vichitravirya!
At this, the impetuous Nakula, O monarch, that slayer of hostile heroes, covered all the points of the compass with arrows.
Vaisampayana said, Hearing these various speeches, Dhritarashtra said, The learned Bhishma, the son of Santanu, and the illustrious Rishi Drona, and thyself also (O Vidura), have said the truth and what also is most beneficial to me.
We are Kshatriyas, O king, and sons of the illustrious Pandu.
And beholding Dasarathas son approach and stand before him with ready weapons, Rama of Bhrigus line smilingly addressed him, O son of Kunti, saying, O king, O exalted one, string, if thou canst, with all thy mighty, this bow which in my hands was made the instrument of destroying the Kshatriya race.
The noise of musical instruments, O monarch, arose there, for enhancing the martial enthusiasm of the soldiers.
The battle between them, O king, was fought equally for a long while.
Vaisampayana said, After Bhima had pledged himself to accomplish the task, saying, I will do it, the Pandavas, O Bharata, returned home with the alms they had obtained during the day.
The twin Aswins also, O king, sank into the sheet of water.
And, O great king, the friendly match at dice then commenced.
O mighty-armed one, be merciful to me, O foremost of righteous persons!
Like a second wielder of the thunderbolt, O son of Radha, do thou in great battle achieve that feat worthy of a hero which was not achieved by those two.
But, O chastiser of foes, by (lapse of a) long time that devotion became lost to the world.
And having saluted him duly, I told him these excellent words,--O Rama, whether thou art equal or superior to me, I will fight with thee, my virtuous preceptor, in battle!
Then Chitrasena, O monarch, with a broad-headed shaft, well-tempered and sharp, cut off Nakulas bow at the handle.
It behoveth thee, O king, to grant me permission (to take up my abode in the woods).
Sanjaya said, That elephant force of thine, O king, swelling with might, fought everywhere, prevailing over the Pandava force.
And though Bhishma said, Drupada, O chastiser of foes, bestowed great attention on everything in connection with that daughter of his, teaching her writing and painting and all the arts.
At thy voice, loud as the roar of the thunder, the ten points, the skies, the heavens, the Earth and our hearts, O bird, thou art continuously shaking.
For, O foremost of men, it was thus that subjugator of hostile cities, king Nala, had fallen into distress along with his wife, in consequence, O bull of Bharata race of dice.
Then, O king, the mighty-armed Bhimasena, possessed of great prowess and mentally resolved to cast off his life-breaths, encountered the ruler of the Madras.
I have been guilty of a transgression, I have now been awakened by thee, O Govinda.
Vaisampayana said, After some length of time, O best of monarchs, Devayani of the fairest complexion went into the same woods for purposes of pleasure.
Indeed, when you knew that dart could always slay one person in battle, and that it was incapable of being either borne or baffled by the very gods with Vasava at their head, why then, O Sanjaya, was it not hurled by Karna at Devakis son, or Phalguna, while he was engaged with this in battle before?
Filling in that dreadful battle all the points of the compass, cardinal and subsidiary, with his leonine shouts, Bhishma felled many car-warriors, O king, (from their cars) and many steeds along with their riders.
The valiant Kripa then, the son of Saradwat, O lord, beholding Hridikas son made carless, quickly bore him away, taking him up on his car.
O, soon take them.
O king, after all the children were born the Rishis dwelling on the mountain of a hundred peaks uttering blessings on them and affectionately performing the first rites of birth, bestowed appellations on them.
Vaisampayana continued, Beholding Bhima casting his eyes on that tree like a mad elephant, the heroic king Yudhishthira the just spake unto his brother, saying, Do not, O Bhima, commit such a rash act.
On hearing him, that illustrious grinder of the Kshatriya race replied, Thou art welcome, O best of regenerate ones!
awaked him with great efforts, the Rakshasa king, still afflicted with anxiety, addressed the mighty Kumbhakarna and said unto him when seated at his ease on his bed, having perfectly recovered consciousness and self-possession, these words, Thou, indeed, art happy, O Kumbhakarna, that canst enjoy profound and undisturbed repose, unconscious of the terrible calamity that hath overtaken us!
I say the truth, O best of all daughters of the snakes.
Unable to obtain peace, the mighty-armed Krishna, that foremost of men, came back, O monarch, to Upaplavya.
I have nothing to do for them, O delighter of the Kurus.
Clad in armour, and armed with his mace of gigantic thickness, Bhima, O monarch, assumed the form of the mighty Garuda.
O hero, O slayer of foes, what is to be wondered at in this that the Pandavas liberated thee when thou wert vanquished by the foe?
Thus addressed, Keshava, O best of kings, said unto Partha, Thou art competent, O best of the Bharatas, to slay the mighty Karna.
And the wonderful sight we saw there, O Bharata, was that neither in their army nor in thine was a single person that was unwilling to fight.
And, O my boy of stainless character!
Deeply pierced, O monarch, with that arrow by that high-souled prince the heroic Citrasena felt great pain and swooned away.
Do thou also observe the duties of a Kshatriya in their highest form.’ Having said these words unto the king, and circumambulating him, Kripa and Kritavarma and Drona’s son, O Bharata, without being able to withdraw their eyes from king Dhritarashtra possessed of great wisdom, urged their steeds towards the banks of the Ganga.
O Brahmana, the battle that took place of old between Arjuna--that foremost of smiters never defeated in battle--and Bhava was highly extraordinary and without parallel.
This is the history of the Pandavas who never acted under the influence of evil passions; and this the account, O first of victorious monarchs of the disunion that ended in the loss of their kingdom by the Kurus and the victory of the Pandavas.
But, O chastiser of foes, hearing what thou hast said, it seemeth to me that thou, O lord, does not think peace to be easily obtainable either in consequence of Dhritarashtras covetousness or from our present weakness.
And thus, O monarch, did those brave warriors, of both thy army and the Pandavas, fight, seeking glory and desirous of victory.
It seems, O Madhava, that though fully able (to save them), thou wert indifferent to these foremost of Kurus who, overwhelmed by insincerity and hypocrisy have all met with destruction.
And, O king!
Blessed be thou, I desire to hear this, O thou foremost of virtuous men, from thee.
O sinless one!
The Brahmanas also, O sinless one, became filled with grief.
O Karna, proceeding to the city of Kasi, alone with thy bow, thou hadst crushed the kings in battle for procuring a bride for the Kuru king!
Believe me, O ruler of men!
O sinless one, by thee shall be vanquished in battle the highly virtuous grandsire of the Kurus--Bhishma of great energy--who is born of the Vasus.
Having obtained thee, O Acyuta, we are not masterless.
O monarch, I will, in this connection, relate to thee that excellent and best of stories, the conversation between Indra and Suravi.
I shall do thy wish, O lady of propitious looks and slender waist.
In consequence of his intelligence, his patience, his beauty, and his youth, my heart, O celestial Rishi, hath been attracted towards him.
And seeing this the mountain Vindhya spake to Surya saying, As thou every day goest round Meru and honourest him by thy circumambulations, do thou even the same by me, O maker of light!
Thou, O king, departest from this world!
Thou art, O Brahmana, obtained by us as the fruit of our great good luck.
Giving them back their just share of the kingdom, O sire, filled with joy, be thou happy with thy sons.
It was in this region, O thou foremost of all acquainted with Brahma, that Mahadeva first receiving her on his head, afterwards let (the sacred stream) Ganga fall from the heavens to the world of men.
And, O eminently pious one, to whom and in what prescribed way did he give it?
Despatched by Dharmas son, this Satyaki cometh to thee, O Partha, having pierced through the Kaurava army, relying on the might of his own arms.
Vasudeva said, There was a certain hunter of animals, O Bharata, of the name of Valaka.
11 Sanjaya said, When the troops, slaughtered by one another, were thus agitated, when many of the warriors fled away and the elephants began to utter loud cries, when the foot-soldiers in that dreadful battle began to shout and wail aloud, when the steeds, O king, ran in diverse directions, when the carnage became awful, when a terrible destruction set in of all embodied creatures, when weapons of various kinds fell or clashed with one another, when cars and elephants began to be mangled together, when heroes felt great delight and cowards felt their fears enhanced, when combatants encountered one another from desire of slaughter, on that awful occasion of the destruction of life, during the progress of that dreadful sport, that is, of that awful battle that enhanced the population of Yamas kingdom, the Pandavas slaughtered thy troops with keen shafts, and, after the same manner, thy troops slew those of the Pandavas.
Having thus obtained the object of his desire, Yavakri came unto his father and said, The Vedas, O father, will be manifest unto thee as well as unto myself and I have obtained boons whereby we shall excel all men.
Just at that time, O Bharata, the Rishi Mandapala arrived there.
Dussasana however, to the utmost stretch of his power, began to resist Partha, wishing, O Bharata, to protect Bhishma.
And if thou desist, O king, I will certainly kill myself.
The Lord of justice said,--Even by nature, O Pandava, hast thou been endued with these qualities, for thou art the Lord of justice himself!
Thy troops, O monarch, then fled away in fear on all sides.
Penetrating into their camp in the night, O king, I have slain Dhrishtadyumna, that wight of sinful deeds, as one kills an animal.
Rallying them then, O monarch, thy son who was resolved to maintain his honour, gladdening those warriors of his, said these words unto them: I do not see that spot in the earth or on the mountains, whither if ye fly, the Pandavas will not slay you!
The prince, O king, fell down and immediately expired.
11,000 cars, O bull of Bharatas race, 10,700 elephants, and full 200,000 horses, and three millions of foot, composed the strength of thy army.
These, O monarch, were the sons of that royal sage of mighty energy.
Then many Pandava warriors, O king, with Shikhandi and Satyaki, desirous of rescuing the king from the son of Radha, surrounded the former.
O, tell us all about it.
Dhritarashtra said,--Thou hast, O Sanjaya, told me everything about the first subject very elaborately.
As regards myself, however, O Bharata, I have not fled from the field of battle actuated by the fear of life!
Some elephants, approaching mail-clad car-warriors, O sire, raised them aloft from their vehicles and hurled them down with great force upon the Earth in that fierce and awful fight.
That fear, O king, and that grief, which had been ours upon the fall of Bhishma, of Drona, and of the Sutas son, O Bharata, now became ours once more, O monarch.
O auspicious lady, she does not please me any longer.
Vaisampayana continued, The Vrishnis, as they heard, O king, that dreadful account became filled with grief and sorrow and pain.
It is for that, O Bhima, that thou hast fallen down.’ Having said these words, the mighty-armed Yudhishthira proceeded on, without looking back.
It behoveth thee, O ascetic, to say who will protect this steed while roaming over the Earth freely according to its will.
And, O bull of the Bharata race, having obtained the consent both of her father and mother, Damayanti caused Nala to be brought to her apartments.
Say unto them, O Janardana, that I am well.
Like Vasudevas son who is firmly resolved for the sake of the Pandavas, I also, O thou that makest profuse presents to Brahmanas, am prepared to cast away my possessions, my body itself, my children, and my wife, for Duryodhanas sake!
O Sesha, tell me the desire implanted in thy breast.
O auspicious one, thou seemest to me as a goddess roaming at thy pleasure!
But, O represser of foes, thou hast yet to accomplish the purposes of the gods.
The form then of Duryodhana whose body was half raised looked like that of a poisonous snake, O Bharata, shorn of its tail.
O tell me in full what else Arjuna, did I do not see even the most trivial thing to Jishnu that is censurable.
Aiming a long shaft equipped with wings of gold, the son of Pandu then cut off, O monarch, the bow of Satyasena.
Therefore, O Brahmana, saint and grandsire do thou so ordain that under thy protection we may safety reach the Himalaya mountains, the performance of my sacrifice being entirely within thy control, and then the adorable celestial saint Narada and Devasthana have also addressed exquisite and well-meaning words for our well being.
And with that arrowy shower, O king, my four steeds and charioteer were completely covered!
Thus addressed, the Brahmana replied unto that best of kings, saying, Tell me, O king, what the limits are of the territories subject to thee.
And he said unto the Grandsire, O illustrious one, protect me from these, and let these creatures have their food assigned unto them!
And, O foremost of kings, Kshemavriddhi on his part, discharged at Samva mightier volley of shafts, aided by his powers of illusion!
Therefore, O king, I shall not take thy decrepitude.
Create fire, O puissant Lord!
Do thou, O longarmed one, command me.
Then, O monarch, the king of Chedi offered his kingdom unto Bhima and said smilingly,--O sinless one, upon what art thou bent?
If Duryodhana inflicted these wrongs on the sons of Pandu, it is thy duty, O king of men, to undo them all.
Knowest thou not, O Karna, that when the chief is slain, the sons of Dhritarashtra will all be slain?
And the Grandsire addressing him, that penance-practising one of great fortitude, said, What is that thorn doest, O Sesha?
And, O king, (Yudhishthira) the son of Pandu hearing that his dear brother Jaya, the son of Kunti, was engaged in such asceticism in the great forest, began to grieve for him.
O crusher of foes, I hope thou wilt, with all thy brothers, make excellent gifts for the sake of that son of Surya.
Sanjaya said,--After the great part of the forenoon of that awful day had worn out, in that terrific engagement, O king, that was (so) destructive downpours.
O Bharata, looked as if strewn with hills.
Then, O great king!
O thou of mighty arms, rule now, with care, this earth that is divested of all thy foes, and enjoy with us, all kinds of enjoyable articles!
O son of the Kuru race?
O bull of the Bharata race, we have not been able to discover either their track or their present abode.
We have been gratified with thee; O hero, thy conquests have been enough.
Agni said, Dost thou, O Mahendra, remember that in olden times when the sage Chyavana officiated at the sacrifice of Saryati with the twin gods Aswins and himself appropriated the Soma offering alone, thou wert filled with wrath, and when bent upon preventing Saryatis sacrifice, thou didst violently strike Chyavana with thy thunderbolt?
Vardhakshemi, O monarch, who was like the ocean at full tide, having had his weapons exhausted in battle, hath at last obtained undisturbed peace.
Do not, O Bharata, set the heart upon means of success that are unjust and improper.
This conduct of thine, O sinless one, is not proper.
Seeing his bow cut off, O king, Shakuni, the son of Subala, took up a formidable scimitar and hurled it at Sahadeva.
Shalya said, Behold this awful field of battle, O hero, covered with heaps of slain men and steeds and elephants.
Be cheered, O Bharata!
What act was done by the preceptors son, O bull among men, in consequence of which he succeeded in slaying, single-handed, all our men in battle?
How can I, therefore, O hero, give thee, O sinless one, leave to go?
When the two protectors of his car-wheels were (thus) slain by the high-souled son of Pandu, Shalya, O king, slew five and twenty warriors among the Cedis.
Vaisampayana said, O king, thus conversing together, they saw with delight the extensive domains of Suvahu, situated on the Himalayas abounding in horses and elephants, densely inhabited by the Kiratas and the Tanganas, crowded by hundreds of Pulindas, frequented by the celestials, and rife with wonders.
Even these were the words that a voice in the skies had said unto Pritha on the seventh day after thy birth, O thou of foolish understanding!
And Agastya smilingly answered Ilwala, saying, We know thee, O Asura, to be possessed of great power and also enormous wealth.
Shalya said, O foremost of men, many a time have I heard this excellent and celestial history, recited to me, of those two lions among gods.
And as the king Duryodhana was seated on an elevated bedstead endued with the effulgence of fire, himself looking like the moon under an eclipse, towards the small hours of the morning Karna, approaching him, said, Fortunate it is, O son of Gandhari, that thou art alive!
Those Rakshasas hearing this speech of Bhima, said, So be it, and gave, O king, the desired promise.
Once more, O monarch, he struck Yudhishthira with a straight shaft in the very sight of all the troops.
Thus addressed, in battle, by Karna, that prince of snakes, unable from rage to bear those words, himself proceeded, O king, for the slaughter of Partha, having assumed the form of an arrow.
And the ruler of the Kalingas with many thousands of cars, and Ketumat with ten thousand elephants and the Nishadas, surrounded Bhimasena, O king, on all sides.
See now, O thou of wicked soul, the terrible consequence of those acts as also of the other wrongs that thou didst unto the innocent Parthas!
Thus addressed by the illustrious son of Pandu, the Gandharvas, laughing aloud, replied unto him saying, O child, there is but one in the world whose behests we obey and living under whose rule we pass our days in happiness: O Bharata, we always act as that one only person commandeth us!
It has been heard by me, O best of kings, that the object I seek for my preceptor is under thy control, O monarch.
Then the preceptor Kripa, of noble heart, who is of a quite disposition, O monarch, and mild temper, therefore, returned soon unto him, said these words.
After the fall of the Madra king, O monarch, thy troops, struck with fear and mangled with arrows, were like masterless men desirous of a protector or a herd of deer afflicted by a lion.
Which of these, O king, wouldst thou choose, and where, O foremost of monarchs, shall we spend this year?
Indeed, many of them at a time, filled with joy, cheerfully shouted, sometimes saying, Excellent, O Karna!
Thou, however, O mighty-armed one, hast witnessed it with thy own eyes.
Then in that assembly of kings, Vidura said loudly, Sanjaya, O great king, hath fallen down on the ground senseless, and cannot utter a word, bereft of sense and his intellect clouded.
On that occasion, O Karna, this virtue of thine did not manifest itself.
I do not know, O mighty-armed one, what sin Sahadeva may have committed for which that hero of unbaffled prowess suffereth such misery.
Vaishampayana said, Listen, O king, to this wonderful history of what transpired truly in a former Kalpa!
There, O thou that art difficult of being vanquished, I will curb thy old pride about which the Brahmanas speak!
The gods and the Gandharvas, every month, O ruler of men, repair to that sacred tirtha which is the resort of Brahman himself.
